Title: Learning Compositional Latent Structure with Vector Networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.28007v1

Published Time: Thu, 28 May 2026 00:43:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
# Learning Compositional Latent Structure with Vector Networks 

Niclas Pokel 

Institute of Neuroinformatics, UZH / ETH Zurich ETH AI Center Zurich, Switzerland 

npokel@ethz.ch 

Benjamin F. Grewe 

Institute of Neuroinformatics, UZH / ETH Zurich ETH AI Center Zurich, Switzerland 

bgrewe@ethz.ch 

Abstract 

Deep networks are powerful function approximators, but they typically store many different computations in shared weight matrices, making it difficult to selectively reuse or adapt parts of them when a familiar structure appears in novel combinations. We introduce the Vector Network (VN), a hierarchical recurrent architecture in which each layer replaces a fixed weight matrix with a library of reusable rank-1 weight atoms. For each input, VN minimizes a layer-local energy to infer a sparse set of active weight atoms and their coefficients, jointly constrained by bottom-up input reconstruction and top-down feedback consistency. These weight atom coefficients then compose an input-specific low-rank weight matrix for that sample. After convergence, slow learning updates only the selected weight atoms through local residual signals scaled by the inferred coefficients. We evaluate VN on four compositional benchmarks spanning 1D signals, 2D spatial decoding, N-body dynamics, and compositional MNIST. VN matches strong baselines in distribution while often achieving out-of-distribution error about an order of magnitude lower when familiar factors must be recombined in novel ways. Vector networks thus make compositional generalization a structural property of the architecture and inference process rather than a brittle byproduct of fitting many behaviors into one shared dense parameter substrate. 

1 Introduction 

Modern deep networks trained with error backpropagation typically rely on a shared dense parameter substrate to implement many different computations. Because gradients are aggregated at the outputs and propagated through all layers, many different behaviors are written into the same shared weight space. Over training, this can produce what we term weight entanglement : distinct features, skills, and behaviors become encoded in overlapping directions of the same weight matrix Elhage et al. [2022]. Improvements for one behavior tend to move parameters along directions that also affect others. Since the objective constrains only the final fit, not how internal computations are decomposed, there is no direct pressure for weights to stabilize into identifiable, reusable functional components that could later be selectively recombined, although post-hoc interpretability methods can sometimes identify responsible human-aligned units or circuits Bau et al. [2017], Olah et al. [2020]. This matters because, in a compositional system, one would like addressable responsibility in weight space : learned weight components whose contributions can be isolated, recombined into a task-specific function, and updated independently. Standard deep networks do not naturally provide such persistent objects in parameter space. The problem is therefore not only that representations become mixed, but that the corresponding transformations are stored in one shared substrate rather than in reusable units. Several existing approaches partly address this problem. Routing-based models such as Mixture-of-Experts and capsules Jacobs et al. [1991], Shazeer et al. [2017], Sabour 

> arXiv:2605.28007v1 [cs.LG] 27 May 2026

Figure 1: Vector Networks Compose Input-Specific Function from Sparse Weight Atoms. (A) A VN layer replaces one dense weight matrix with reusable rank-1 weight atoms. Sparse coefficients gl,i are inferred to re-construct the current input x while propagating upward information to hl and receiving reverse reconstruction targets from above. (B) A weight atom is a pair of code vectors defining A(l,i ) = ul,i s⊤

> l,i

, a rank-1 weight atom mapping sensing space sl to output space ul. The activ-ity gl,i scales its contribution. (C) Standard networks apply a fixed monolithic matrix W , so tasks share the same parameter space. VN instead composes a few fixed weight atoms into W ⋆l (xl) = P 

> i

g⋆l,i (xl)A(l,i ), allow-ing new inputs to be processed using recombinations of learned function components rather than interpolations within a fixed mapping. et al. [2017], Hinton et al. [2018] introduce selective computation, but their selectivity operates through feedforward routing over dense modules or experts, whereas VN performs iterative sparse inference over a library of much smaller shared rank-1 weight components. Other approaches impose useful structure through post-hoc low-rank factorization, convolutional locality, or modular and object-centric inductive biases Denil et al. [2013], Denton et al. [2014], LeCun et al. [1998], Greff et al. [2019], Locatello et al. [2020]. These methods can be highly effective, but they still do not make reusable per-sample responsibility in weight space explicit. More generally, without appropriate inductive biases, latent factors are not typically recovered as reusable structure from observations alone Locatello et al. [2019]. Here we argue that if those factors are to be recombined to explain new inputs, the learned transformation must also itself become decomposable into reusable components. Our Vector Network (VN) architecture thus takes a different approach (Fig. 1A–C): it neither assigns predefined semantic roles to particular weight modules nor uses one fixed weight matrix. Instead, each layer is parameterized as a library of reusable rank-1 weight atoms (Fig. 1A), each defined by a learned code vector pair as in Fig. 1B, and for each input the model infers a sparse combination of these atoms to synthesize the effective transformation applied to that sample. Sparse Weight-Atom Inference 

optimizes a scalar coefficient for each atom under sparsity, layer-input reconstruction, and top-down feedback consistency, so that only a small active set remains. After inference converged, the active weight atoms define the effective input-specific weight matrix (Fig. 1C). The same inferred sparse responsibility pattern concentrates slow learning on that selected subset rather than writing every sample directly into one shared full-rank matrix. In this way, vector networks make compositionality an explicit weight-space inference problem, allowing learned weight components to be selectively recombined into input-specific transformations for novel combinations of familiar structure. 

Contributions. 

1. Rank-1 weight atoms as fundamental building blocks to compose network function. Each layer maintains a dictionary of reusable rank-1 weight atoms, allowing network function to be addressable, inspectable, and composable rather than entangled in a single dense weight matrix. 2. The effective weight matrix is inferred by energy minimization over weight atom coefficients. 

For every sample a fast inference process minimizes a layer-local energy over weight atom coefficients under a sparsity constraint. Only after convergence do the inferred weight atoms define a tailored, input-specific W ⋆(x).3. After inference, the selected weight atoms receive Atomic-Hebb updates. Slow learning follows the same energy locally, shaping the weight atom library through weight-atom-local residual updates scaled by inferred weight atom responsibility, so only selected atoms are modified. 4. Sparse weight-atom responsibility structurally limits weight-update overlap. Because updates act only on the sparse active set, only a few responsible weight atoms are modified while inactive ones remain largely unchanged, limiting diffuse overlap between unrelated updates. 22 Related Work 

Sparse coding, ICA, and dictionary learning. Classical sparse coding and ICA showed that observations can admit sparse, parts-based representations with explicit support selection Olshausen and Field [1996, 1997], Bell and Sejnowski [1995, 1997], Rozell et al. [2008]. This gives a clear notion of responsibility, since only the active support explains the current input and is updated. VN inherits the sparse-inference idea, but shifts it from latent-state selection to inference over reusable 

weight atoms that define the sample-specific transformation itself. 

Predictive coding and energy-based inference. Predictive-coding and energy-based models also use iterative inference with local learning Rao and Ballard [1999], Friston [2010], Whittington and Bogacz [2017], Oliviers et al. [2025]. VN is closely related in optimization structure: here too, fast variables are latent coefficients inferred under fixed learned dictionaries. The distinction is architectural rather than procedural. In standard predictive coding or sparse coding, inferred activities are latent states within a fixed mapping. In VN, each inferred coefficient scales a learned rank-1 operator ul,i s⊤

> l,i

, so inference selects and composes the sample-specific operator itself rather than only the latent state passed through a fixed weight matrix. For a detailed comparison see Appendix A. 

Routing, modularity, and object-centric approaches. Mixture-of-experts, capsules, and object-centric models address compositionality by routing among experts, part-whole representations, or object slots Jacobs et al. [1991], Shazeer et al. [2017], Sabour et al. [2017], Hinton et al. [2018], Greff et al. [2019], Locatello et al. [2020]. These approaches can be highly effective, but their selectivity operates through feedforward routing over dense modules or latent entities, whereas VN uses iterative sparse inference under an explicit energy to select a competitive combination of shared rank-1 weight components that together define the sample-specific transformation. 

Low-rank factorization and parameter-efficient adaptation (PEA). Low-rank factorizations and PEA methods constrain weights or updates to lower-dimensional subspaces Denil et al. [2013], Denton et al. [2014], Hu et al. [2022], but they do not usually provide explicit per-sample responsibility over reusable weight components. 

3 Vector Network Architecture 

Next we define the core vector network architecture and weight-atom inference. Concretely, the modular structure is implemented by stacked layers of rank-1 weight atoms (Fig. 1A). Each layer infers sparse weight atom coefficients for the current input, uses them to reconstruct the input and send a dense interface message upward, and receives a top-down target from the layer above during recurrent refinement. We index layers by l ∈ { 1, . . . , L }. Each layer has an input vector xl ∈ Rdl , a sparse signed activity vector gl ∈ RKl , and a top-down interface target hl, target ∈ Rml . Each layer stores an input reconstruction dictionary Sl ∈ Rdl×Kl and an interface dictionary Ul ∈ Rml×Kl ,with columns {sl,i } and {ul,i }. Implementations may use separate interface dictionaries for forward and backward messaging; below we use the tied case Ul for readability. Dense coupling enforces 

dl+1 = ml and identifies the next-layer input with the dense message, xl+1 ≡ ϕl(Ulgl).

3.1 Rank-1 Weight Atoms as Forward-Feedback Operators 

In layer l, weight atom i is a paired set of unit code vectors in input and output space (Fig. 1B; maintained at unit norm by the per-column renormalisation in Sec. 3.4), which together define the rank-1 atom A(l,i ):

sl,i ∈ Rdl , ul,i ∈ Rml , A(l,i ) = ul,i s⊤

> l,i

. (1) After inference has settled, the weight atom coefficients g⋆l (xl) ∈ RKl synthesize an instance-conditioned weight matrix as a short sum of these weight atoms (Fig. 1C), 

W ⋆l (xl) = 

> Kl

X

> i=1

g⋆l,i (xl) A(l,i ) =

> Kl

X

> i=1

g⋆l,i (xl) ul,i s⊤

> l,i

. (2) The same atom coefficients gl serve two coupled roles: they reconstruct the current layer input as ˆxl = Slgl and, through the layer output dictionary Ul, generate the dense upward message 3hl = ϕl(Ulgl) passed to the next layer, where ϕl is typically identity or ReLU. Thus, inference does not apply one fixed dense matrix. Instead, it infers a sparse code g⋆l that both selects a small set of reusable weight atoms and determines the upward message. We use W ⋆l (xl) as a compact operator description induced by the inferred sparse code. Top-down information enters each layer through 

hl, target , a target later refreshed from the higher layer during recurrent inference (Sec. 3.3). Because each A(l,i ) is rank 1, the rank of W ⋆l (xl) is limited by how many weight atoms are active in g⋆l . Under an explicit hard top-kl constraint, at most kl atom coefficients are allowed to be nonzero, so the per-sample transformation has rank at most kl regardless of the total dictionary size (see Proposition 2, Appendix E.4). Because the reconstruction map is linear in the sparse code, superpositions are preserved at the decoder level: for two codes ga and gb, Sl(ga + gb) = Slga + Slgb. Superposition is therefore preserved exactly, while exact recovery of novel compositions depends on the sparse inference conditions stated in App. E.1. 

3.2 Layer-Local Energy for Input Reconstruction, Atom Sparsity, and Top-Down Consistency 

The deep VN tracks a layer-local energy in the sparse coefficients gl. For layer l, we define the tied energy form as 

El(gl | xl, h l, target ) = 12 ∥xl − Slgl∥22 + λl∥gl∥1 + 12 ∥hl, target − Ulgl∥22. (3) Here λl is the layer-specific sparsity parameter, typically increased with depth so that higher layers use progressively sparser, more selective codes. The energy terms have the following roles: (i) 

Slgl reconstructs the current input xl, and (ii) Ulgl remains consistent with hl, target , the interface code supplied by deeper layers. At the top layer there is no higher layer to provide hL, target , so the top-down term is omitted. The ℓ1 penalty induces sparsity through the proximal soft-thresholding update soft( z, τ ) = sign( z) max( |z| − τ, 0) , setting coefficients below threshold to zero. Hidden layers use this soft-thresholding update, while the top layer is additionally constrained by a hard top-kL support cap, meaning that at most kL coefficients are allowed to remain nonzero. For a single layer (fixed xl, h l, target , S l, U l), El acts as a Lyapunov energy for the fast coefficient inference: each accepted proximal step is required to decrease or leave unchanged this energy until a sparse fixed point is reached. In the full deep stack, the layer targets are themselves refreshed during recurrent inference, so the summed layer-local terms serve as per-sweep energy accounting rather than as a strict global Lyapunov proof. The same energy organizes both phases of the model: fast inference minimizes it with respect to the atom activities gl, while slow learning minimizes it with respect to the selected atom vectors. We next describe these two uses in turn. 

3.3 Fast Inference of a Sparse Set of Rank-1 Weight-Atom Coefficients 

Inference in the deep VN proceeds by a small number of global upward and downward sweeps. At each layer, coefficient inference is a proximal-gradient step on the layer energy El, i.e. an ISTA-style update Parikh and Boyd [2014], with optional FISTA-style acceleration Beck and Teboulle [2009]. For layer l, we denote by ∇fl(gl) the gradient of the smooth part of El, i.e. the quadratic reconstruction and top-down consistency terms: 

∇fl(gl) = S⊤ 

> l

(Slgl − xl) + U ⊤ 

> l

(Ulgl − hl, target ), (4) where the U term is omitted when hl, target is not defined (top layer). With layer-specific step size 

ηl > 0, the soft-k update and its hard-k variant are 

gl ← soft( gl − ηl ∇fl(gl), η lλl) , (5) 

gl ← Πkl



soft  gl − ηl ∇fl(gl), η lλl



. (6) Eq. (5) is the standard proximal soft-thresholding step for the ℓ1 term, so sub-threshold coefficients are set exactly to zero. Eq. (6) adds an explicit top-kl projection Πkl , which keeps the kl largest-magnitude coefficients when a strict cardinality budget is required. In our experiments, hidden layers use the soft-k regime, while the top layer may use a strict hard top-k budget (see Remark 5 for the design rationale). At the network level, these local coefficient updates are organized into recurrent upward and downward passes, with the downward pass acting as a reverse reconstruction path in an encoder–decoder-like settle: upward pass: xl+1 ← hl = ϕl(Ulgl), downward pass: hl, target ← ˆxl+1 = Sl+1 gl+1 . (7) 4In the upward pass, one coefficient update is taken at each layer as activity propagates bottom-up. In the downward pass, for each l = L−1, . . . , 1, the refreshed target is used to refine gl again through the same update rule, now using both bottom-up and top-down residuals; the top-down term plays the role of a predictive-coding consistency signal, which we discuss further in App. E.5. Inference stops when the relative energy improvement falls below a tolerance τE or after a maximum number of sweeps; a sweep may also be rejected if it increases energy. With ηl scaled by the inverse Lipschitz constant of the local Hessian, the soft-k proximal updates monotonically decrease the layer energy and converge to a stationary point (Theorem 3, Appendix E.3). 

3.4 Slow Learning Updates the Inferred Rank-1 Weight Atoms 

Once fast inference has converged, learning updates only the selected atom vectors, i.e. the dictionary columns with nonzero coefficients, using strictly local residual ×atom coefficient signals. The inactive atoms are left unchanged, and inference itself is treated as a black box that is not differentiated through. For layer l, we define the settled residual errors in the two spaces as 

rxl = xl − Slg⋆l , rhl = hl, target − Ulg⋆l (8) (when hl, target is defined). A direct local gradient step is then 

Sl ← Sl + ρSl rxl (g⋆l )⊤, Ul ← Ul + ρUl rhl (g⋆l )⊤, (9) where r g ⊤ denotes the batch-averaged outer product over a batch of size B, and ρSl , ρ Ul are local learning rates. For the top layer (no hL, target ), the interface update is skipped. In the implementation, these residual ×atom-coefficient terms are used as local gradients for Adam, followed by renormal-ization. We term this update rule Atomic-Hebb because it is distinct from classical pre–post(error) Hebbian type plasticity: each step combines local residual error with inferred weight-atom contri-bution, so credit assignment is weight-atom local rather than neuron local. Further, by applying Danskin’s Theorem at the inference equilibrium, we prove that these local residual products are exactly equivalent to the implicit gradients of the global free energy (see Theorem 2, Appendix E.2). 

4 Experiments 

Across the following four experiments, models are trained in distribution (ID) and evaluated on both ID and out-of-distribution (OOD) cases formed by novel combinations of previously seen factors. OOD cases span increasing compositional difficulty, from simple recombinations to harder interac-tions of familiar factors. Because most are reconstruction tasks, we report absolute reconstruction error and how performance changes from familiar ID structure to composed OOD cases. 

4.1 Spatial Composition: Generalizing to Novel Bump Positions 

We begin with a simple spatial reconstruction benchmark adapted from Liang et al. Liang et al. [2025], because it isolates the weight entanglement problem in a particularly clean form. As shown in Fig. 2a, the model receives a low-dimensional code for the x- and y-position of a target bump and must reconstruct a Gaussian bump at that location on a 28 × 28 grid. Training is restricted to a local spatial region outside a square holdout zone, while OOD evaluation probes that unseen center region. This makes the benchmark a minimal test of whether a learned decoder can preserve a reusable spatial factorization off support, rather than only interpolating within the training region. Our reproduction recovers the basic pattern reported by Liang et al. Liang et al. [2025]. The spatial error maps in Fig. 2b show that standard CNN- and VAE-based decoders develop pronounced OOD error inside the holdout zone, whereas hand-factorized decoders remain much more structured but less performant. Quantitatively, Fig. 2c shows the core tradeoff: the CNN exhibits a large OOD decline, whereas the hand-built rank-1 factorized decoder generalizes more predictably but remains limited in absolute reconstruction performance. VN improves on both, combining low OOD error with strong ID performance. Figure 2d strengthens this point by showing that the OOD/ID ratio of the CNN decoder worsens with depth, i.e. the deeper the network, the more strongly entangled its off-support input–output mapping becomes. VN seems to combine the two desiderata more effectively. A VN decoder maintains uniformly low reconstruction error across the full spatial domain (Fig. 2b). It achieves substantially lower OOD error 5while preserving strongest ID performance (Fig. 2c), and even improves slightly with network depth (Fig. 2d). The full VN encoder–decoder improves robustness further by discovering the factorization end to end rather than receiving it as a hand-built prior. Thus, even in this simple toy setting, VN does not merely avoid CNN weight entanglement; it learns some form of a reusable decomposition in its weight atoms that supports reconstruction in the unseen spatial region. For extended results on this experiment please see Appendix F; full sweeps and component-removal ablations are reported in Apps. F–F. 

Figure 2: Spatial Composition: Generaliz-ing to Novel Bump Positions (a) Task setup (adapted from Liang et al. [2025]). A decoder maps (x, y ) to an N × N output grid. Training covers a local ID region, while testing probes an unseen OOD region. (b) Spatial reconstruc-tion error (MSE) across the grid. CNN, VAE, and factorized decoders show strong OOD er-ror, whereas the VN decoder remains low across the full space. (c) Reconstruction MSE on ID and OOD regions. VN-based models achieve much lower OOD error while maintaining strong ID performance. Error bars are 95% CI. (d) 

OOD/ID error ratio vs. depth. CNN decoders degrade rapidly with depth, whereas VN remains stable and improves with depth (inset: zoom on VNs). 

4.2 Function Composition: Generalizing to Unseen Signal Combinations 

We next test the compositional capabilities of VN by training on single primitive functions and evaluating on unseen compositions of these primitives (Fig. 3a). Each 1D signal is sampled from one of four elementary function families— a sin( f t + ϕ), a cos( f t + ϕ), a bounded polynomial a(t/ 2π)f ,or a Gaussian bump a e −0.3f (t−π)2

—with randomized parameters. The ID task is to reconstruct signals from a single family, while the OOD sets require novel compositions of those same primitives: Easy-OOD uses cross-family sums such as sin( f1t + ϕ1) + a cos( f2t + ϕ2), whereas Hard-OOD uses nested and mixed nonlinear compositions such as sin  cos( f1t) + f2t/ (2 π) + a cos  f3(t/ (2 π)) 2.This first part of the benchmark is therefore a reconstruction task, asking whether a model can reuse familiar components when the signal structure changes beyond the training distribution. 

Figure 3: Function Composition: Generalizing to Novel Signal Combinations. (a) Training and test structure. Models are trained on individual function families drawn from the in-distribution (ID) set. Easy-OOD tests require linear recombination of learned functions, whereas Hard-OOD tests require non-linear compositions of previously learned functions. (b) Reconstruction MSE for ID, Easy-OOD, and Hard-OOD conditions. (c) Average Hard-OOD masked prediction MSE across the four masking regimes shown above. All bar plots are sorted by mean performance; error bars are 95% CI. VN-1L/3L: 1 and 3 layer VN. The reconstruction results in Fig. 3b show that the benchmark is nontrivial, but they do not yet cleanly separate compositional structure learning from strong sequence modeling. In particular, 6both Transformer and Mamba outperform VN on the Easy-OOD and Hard-OOD reconstruction settings. At the same time, the bottlenecked Mamba variant performs worse than Mamba on ID but substantially better on OOD, suggesting that constraining the representation already pushes the model toward more reusable internal structure. This ambiguity arises because reconstruction still admits shortcut solutions: when much of the relevant signal is directly present in the input, a strong sequence model can achieve low error by preserving or continuing that structure without recovering components that can be recombined systematically. VN, by contrast, is intentionally sparsity constrained and must explain each sample through a small active set of weight atoms. Reconstruction alone is therefore informative, but not yet a clean test of genuinely compositional internal structure. To resolve this ambiguity, we introduce the masked prediction variant in Fig. 3c, where part of the signal must be forecast or filled in from the learned representation. This removes near-identity shortcut solutions and makes the task a stricter test of whether the model has learned reusable structure. Under this evaluation, the baseline models degrade much more strongly, whereas VN remains substantially more stable and achieves the clearest advantage. Taken together, these results suggest that VN’s strength in this benchmark is not simply smoother reconstruction, but the recovery of sparse reusable latent structure that supports both reconstruction and prediction under novel function compositions. For extended results and performance analysis please see Appendix G. 

4.3 Force Composition: Generalization in N-body Dynamics 

We next turn to force composition in n-body dynamics, a substantially harder physics benchmark in which the relevant latent factors are the underlying force laws themselves (Fig. 4a). Models are trained only on single-force systems (gravity, drag, Lorentz, or spring) and are then evaluated by predicting per-body accelerations under two simultaneous OOD shifts: multiple forces acting together and reduced body count. Thus the ID setting consists of single-force dynamics with n = 5 

bodies, whereas the OOD setting requires reconstructing mixed-force systems with n = 5 , 4, 3 bodies. This is a much stronger compositional test than interpolation alone: although instantaneous forces superpose linearly, the resulting trajectories diverge under coupled state feedback through positions and velocities, so the model must reuse learned physical mechanisms in unseen superpositions and under shifted state distributions. The main quantitative result is shown in Fig. 4b. All models perform well on the single-force ID cases, but errors rise substantially once forces are combined, and rise further as evaluation moves from two-force mixtures to the harder three- and four-force regimes. The effect becomes even stronger under body dropout, shown by the lighter n = 4 and n = 3 bars. In contrast, the 3-layer VN remains consistently low across these OOD settings and retains a clear margin over MLP, GNN, Transformer, Mamba, and FiLM baselines. We also compare against a ’Factorized’ control, which uses one hand-crafted subnetwork per force and combines their fitted contributions at test time, as well as a random baseline corresponding to chance-level prediction. Even against these controls, fitting the primitive regimes in isolation is not enough: what matters is whether the learned mechanisms can still be recombined when the physical system changes. For extended results see Appendix H. Figure 4c makes this interpretation explicit by comparing mean ID and mean OOD error directly on a log–log scale. Several baselines achieve low ID error yet move far to the right under compositional shift, indicating that good single-force reconstruction does not imply robust transfer to mixed-force dynamics. VN remains closest to the low-error, near-diagonal regime, showing that its advantage here is not simply stronger ID fitting, but more stable reuse of learned force-law structure under increasing compositional load. In that sense, the n-body benchmark provides the clearest evidence in our suite that explicit weight-space responsibility can support mechanism-level composition in a difficult nonlinear setting. 

4.4 Image Composition: Generalizing to Novel MNIST Digit Compositions 

To test whether the same VN capability transfers to vision, we evaluate two compositional MNIST benchmarks constructed for this study (Fig. 5a–c). The first is a digit reconstruction benchmark in which the ID setting consists of single digits, while the OOD conditions require compositions such as Add/Subtract mixtures, Max projections over multiple digits, and structured corruptions; Appendix I reports additional representation and convergence diagnostics. The second is a dynamic 7Figure 4: Force Composition: Generalization in n-body Dynamics. (a) Task setup. Models are trained on single force fields (gravity, drag, Lorentz, spring) with n = 5 bodies and then evaluated out of distribution on mixed-force systems and reduced body counts ( n = 5 , 4, 3). (b) Mean OOD MSE under force composition. Left: mean over all two-force combinations. Right: mean over all three- and four-force combinations. Error bars are 95% CIs; within each model, lighter bars denote reduced body count ( n = 4 , 3). (c) Mean OOD vs. mean ID performance on a log–log scale, averaged across n = 5 , 4, 3. Each point is one model, with ID MSE on the y-axis and OOD MSE on the x-axis. The dashed diagonal marks equal ID and OOD performance; models that degrade under distribution shift move to the right and below this line. VN remains closest to the ideal low-error, near-diagonal regime, indicating stronger robustness and compositional generalization. Rotation/Translation/Scaling (RTS) benchmark in which single transformations define the ID setting and OOD evaluation requires stronger and more complex transformation compositions, including larger step sizes and multiple digits transformed simultaneously (Fig. 5b). In both cases the task is reconstruction: for standard MNIST, the model reconstructs the image itself, whereas for RTS it reconstructs the transformation-induced motion signal dx . Baselines are compared against autoen-coders (AEs) at matched ID performance or matched bottleneck sparsity, so any OOD differences cannot be explained by capacity or sparsity alone. The digit benchmark already shows a clear separation (Fig. 5a). All models perform well on single-digit ID cases, but the difference appears once the test set requires composition or corruption. Under Add/Subtract mixtures, Max projections, and structured corruptions, AE reconstruction errors increase substantially, whereas the VN remains much closer to its ID performance. In the strongest OOD conditions, VNs are roughly an order of magnitude better than the corresponding AE baselines. Sparsity-matched AEs also perform worse across both ID and OOD tests, showing that the advantage is not sparsity alone but the VN’s sparse weight-atom structure and reuse. The RTS benchmark shows the same pattern for visual transformations rather than digit identity (Fig. 5b–c). For single transformations, all models perform similarly. When the OOD setting requires larger transformation steps or simultaneous transformations of multiple digits, AE baseline errors increase steadily, while the VN degrades much more gracefully and preserves digit structure more reliably. Thus the same advantage that appears in static digit composition also extends to a dynamic visual setting in which the relevant factors are transformations rather than image content. Overall, the MNIST results provide the strongest visual confirmation of the central pattern seen throughout the paper. Strong performance on simple ID regimes does not imply compositional generalization, even in vision. Dense baselines perform well when interpolation is sufficient, but degrade once familiar components or transformations must be recombined in unfamiliar ways. The VN remains substantially more stable across both content and motion settings, consistent with the idea that explicit weight-space responsibility can support reusable structure across the spatial, function-composition, and physics benchmarks considered above. 8Figure 5: Image Composition: Generalizing to MNIST Compositions (a) VN reconstruction error on MNIST ID and OOD composition tests. (b) Representative Rotation/Translation/Scaling (RTS) ID training samples and OOD test compositions of different motions. (c) Motion reconstruction error on ID/OOD RTS transformations; faint bars denote sparsity-matched AE variants. OOD tests combine familiar transformations outside the training distribution, and VN again achieves the strongest OOD performance while remaining competitive on ID. Error bars are 95% CI. 

5 Discussion 

While VN is often comparable to strong baselines on in-distribution cases, its advantage becomes clear in out-of-distribution settings where previously learned components must be recombined into novel compositions. In those regimes, VN frequently achieves substantially lower error, often by about an order of magnitude, and often achieves lower error than strong modern baselines such as Transformers and Mamba. The main advantage of VN therefore seems to lie less in ordinary interpolation than in preserving reusable structure as compositional load increases. The architecture and learning rule of VN explicitly target the preservation of reusable structure under increasing superposition by making weight responsibility explicit before plasticity. VN first infers which weight atoms were responsible for the current explanation and then updates those components through atom responsibility ×error (Atomic-Hebb). This fast-recombination / slow-storage split localizes plasticity and helps reduce diffuse overlap between unrelated updates while preserving weight-atom recomposability across inputs (see Remark 4 for contrast to BP credit assignment). The same weight-atom structure suggests several broader advantages. First, once a useful library of latent factors has been learned, new inputs can be handled by recomposition rather than by storing each factorial combination separately. This offers a natural route toward improved data efficiency, especially in the long tail, where the challenge is not simply interpolation between seen cases but reuse of familiar parts in unfamiliar combinations. In this sense, VN may scale more gracefully with the number of latent factors that must be discovered than with the number of training examples needed to cover their combinations. Explicit weight-atom responsibility may also be useful for continual learning, because it provides a direct sample-wise signal of which reusable components were important for the current explanation. A cautious extension is that some new behavior may be incorporated by refining a small subset of existing components, or where necessary adding a few new ones, rather than reworking an entire dense shared substrate. In spirit this is related to parameter-efficient schemes and their variants such as LoRA, which also restrict adaptation to a low-rank subspace, but here the relevant components are selected and later complemented by input-dependent inference rather than introduced as fixed adaptation factors Hu et al. [2022]. The main limitation of the current VN is practical rather than conceptual: explicit weight-atom responsibility is presently obtained through a recurrent sparse settle. While this yields interpretability and modularity, in its current form the VN inference is significantly slower than a single feedforward application and currently limits efficiency. This also points to the most immediate path forward. Prior 9work has shown that iterative sparse-coding inference can be approximated by learned feedforward updates Gregor and LeCun [2010], suggesting that learned support initializers or hybrid fast/slow inference could substantially shorten the VN settle once the sparse support has stabilized Graves [2016], Marino et al. [2018], Monga et al. [2021]. Overall, the contribution of the VN is not only in the current benchmarks, but in the design principle it makes explicit: generalization should rely on reusable weight structure rather than on continually fitting new cases into one monolithic parameter field. In this sense, VN points beyond standard backpropagation toward a regime in which computation first infers sparse responsibility over reusable weight components and learning then acts selectively on that inferred structure. Conceptually, VN shifts compositionality from state routing to responsibility in weight space, which may matter most in real-world settings where familiar factors must be reused in unfamiliar combinations. 

Acknowledgements 

We thank Sander de Haan, Giuseppe Chindemi and Yassine Taoudi-Benchekroun for comments on the manuscript. This work was supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation (189251, 10003772, B.F.G.) and ETH Zurich project funding (ETH-20 19-01, B.F.G.). 

Author Contributions 

B.F.G. conceived the Vector Network architecture, Atomic Hebb rule and developed the first multilayer implementation. N.P. and B.F.G. jointly developed and wrote the present manuscript and the OOD experimental settings. N.P. carried out the mathematical proofs, the function-composition, spatial-decoding (blob), and n-body experiments, and contributed substantially to the experimental analysis and presentation. B.F.G. and N.P. jointly refined the implementation and the final experimental framework. 

References 

Shaojie Bai, J Zico Kolter, and Vladlen Koltun. Deep equilibrium models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32, 2019. Pierre Baldi and Kurt Hornik. Neural networks and principal component analysis: Learning from examples without local minima. Neural Networks , 2(1):53–58, 1989. Peter L Bartlett and Shahar Mendelson. Rademacher and Gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and structural results. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 3:463–482, 2002. David Bau, Bolei Zhou, Aditya Khosla, Aude Oliva, and Antonio Torralba. Network dissection: Quan-tifying interpretability of deep visual representations. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2017. Amir Beck and Marc Teboulle. A fast iterative shrinkage-thresholding algorithm for linear inverse problems. SIAM Journal on Imaging Sciences , 2(1):183–202, 2009. Anthony J. Bell and Terrence J. Sejnowski. An information-maximization approach to blind separation and blind deconvolution. Neural Computation , 7(6):1129–1159, 1995. Neural Computation link. Anthony J. Bell and Terrence J. Sejnowski. The “independent components” of natural scenes are edge filters. Vision Research , 37(23):3327–3338, 1997. Vision Research link. Dimitri P. Bertsekas. Nonlinear programming . Athena Scientific, 2nd edition, 1999. Scott Shaobing Chen, David L. Donoho, and Michael A. Saunders. Atomic decomposition by basis pursuit. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing , 20(1):33–61, 1998. John M. Danskin. The theory of max-min and its application to weapons allocation problems .Springer-Verlag, 1967. 10 Misha Denil, Babak Shakibi, Laurent Dinh, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Nando de Freitas. Predicting parameters in deep learning. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) , 2013. arXiv:1306.0543. Emily L. Denton, Wojciech Zaremba, Joan Bruna, Yann LeCun, and Rob Fergus. Exploiting linear structure in cnns for efficient evaluation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) , 2014. arXiv:1404.0736. David L. Donoho and Michael Elad. Optimally sparse representation in general (nonorthogonal) dictionaries via ℓ1 minimization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (PNAS) , 100 (5):2197–2202, 2003. Nelson Elhage, Tristan Hume, Catherine Olsson, et al. Toy models of superposition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.10652 , 2022. Karl Friston. The free-energy principle: a unified brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience , 11(2): 127–138, 2010. Nature Reviews Neuroscience link. Alex Graves. Adaptive computation time for recurrent neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1603.08983 , 2016. Klaus Greff, Sjoerd van Steenkiste, and Jürgen Schmidhuber. Multi-object representation learning with iterative variational inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) ,2019. Karol Gregor and Yann LeCun. Learning fast approximations of sparse coding. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2010. Geoffrey E. Hinton, Sara Sabour, and Nicholas Frosst. Matrix capsules with em routing. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2018. ICLR link. Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2022. arXiv:2106.09685. Robert A. Jacobs, Michael I. Jordan, Steven J. Nowlan, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Adaptive mixtures of local experts. Neural Computation , 3(1):79–87, 1991. Neural Computation link. Yann LeCun, Léon Bottou, Yoshua Bengio, and Patrick Haffner. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. Proceedings of the IEEE , 86(11):2278–2324, 1998. Yann LeCun, Sumit Chopra, Raia Hadsell, et al. A tutorial on energy-based learning. In Predicting Structured Data . MIT Press, 2006. Qiyao Liang, Daoyuan Qian, Liu Ziyin, and Ila Fiete. Compositional generalization via forced rendering of disentangled latents. In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , 2025. URL https:// openreview.net/pdf/d94a41221acd289b56e4f17f3a3a6390c9c0cee9.pdf .Timothy P. Lillicrap, Daniel Cownden, Colin J. Akerman, and Douglas B. Tweed. Random feedback weights support learning in deep neural networks. Nature Communications , 7:13276, 2016. Francesco Locatello, Stefan Bauer, Mario Lucic, et al. Challenging common assumptions in unsuper-vised learning of disentangled representations. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2019. Francesco Locatello, Dirk Weissenborn, Thomas Unterthiner, et al. Object-centric learning with slot attention. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2020. Julien Mairal, Francis R. Bach, Jean Ponce, and Guillermo Sapiro. Online dictionary learning for sparse coding. In Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) ,pages 689–696, 2009. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/1553374.1553463 .Joe Marino, Yisong Yue, and Stephan Mandt. Iterative amortized inference. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2018. 11 Vishal Monga, Yuelong Li, and Yonina C. Eldar. Algorithm unrolling: Interpretable, efficient deep learning for signal and image processing. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine , 38(2):18–44, 2021. Erkki Oja. A simplified neuron model as a principal component analyzer. Journal of Mathematical Biology , 15(3):267–273, 1982. Chris Olah, Nick Cammarata, Ludwig Schubert, Gabriel Goh, Michael Petrov, and Shan Carter. Zoom in: An introduction to circuits. Distill , 2020. doi: 10.23915/distill.00024.001. https://distill.pub/2020/circuits/zoom-in. Gaspard Oliviers, Mufeng Tang, and Rafal Bogacz. Bidirectional predictive coding, 2025. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.23415 .Bruno A. Olshausen and David J. Field. Emergence of simple-cell receptive field properties by learning a sparse code for natural images. Nature , 381(6583):607–609, 1996. Nature link. Bruno A. Olshausen and David J. Field. Sparse coding with an overcomplete basis set: A strategy employed by v1? Vision Research , 37(23):3311–3325, 1997. Vision Research link. Neal Parikh and Stephen Boyd. Proximal algorithms. Foundations and Trends in Optimization , 1(3): 127–239, 2014. doi: 10.1561/2400000003. Rajesh P. N. Rao and Dana H. Ballard. Predictive coding in the visual cortex: a functional interpreta-tion of some extra-classical receptive-field effects. Nature Neuroscience , 2(1):79–87, 1999. Nature Neuroscience link. Christopher J. Rozell, Don H. Johnson, Richard G. Baraniuk, and Bruno A. Olshausen. Sparse coding via thresholding and local competition in neural circuits. Neural Computation , 20(10):2526–2563, 2008. doi: 10.1162/neco.2008.03-07-486. Sara Sabour, Nicholas Frosst, and Geoffrey E. Hinton. Dynamic routing between capsules. In 

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) , 2017. arXiv:1710.09829. Noam Shazeer, Azalia Mirhoseini, Krzysztof Maziarz, Andy Davis, Le Quoc, Geoffrey Hinton, and Jeff Dean. Sparsely-gated mixture-of-experts. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2017. arXiv:1701.06538. Jeremias Sulam, Vardan Papyan, Yaniv Romano, and Michael Elad. Multi-layer convolutional sparse modeling: Pursuit and dictionary learning. IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , 66(15): 4090–4104, 2018. Ryan J. Tibshirani. The lasso problem and uniqueness. Electronic Journal of Statistics , 7:1456–1490, 2013. Joel A. Tropp. Greed is good: algorithmic results for sparse approximation. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 50(10):2231–2242, 2004. James C. R. Whittington and Rafal Bogacz. An approximation of the error back-propagation algorithm in a predictive coding network. Neural Computation , 29(5):1229–1262, 2017. Frontiers link. 12 Appendix Content List 

• Predictive Coding vs. Vector Networks (Sec. A) • VN vs. Transformers: Sparse Operator Inference vs. State Routing (Sec. B) • Fast Inference of Weight Atom Coefficients in Deep Vector Networks (Sec. C) • Slow Local Dictionary Updates: The Atomic-Hebb rule (Sec. D) • Theoretical Foundations and Proofs (Sec. E) • Spatial Decoding: Extended Results (Sec. F) • Function Composition: Extended Results (Sec. G) • n-Body Dynamics: Extended Results (Sec. H) • MNIST Composition: Extended Results (Sec. I) • Reproducibility: Implementation Details (Sec. ?? )• Hardware and Storage Requirements (Sec. J) 

A Predictive Coding vs. Vector Networks 

This section clarifies the precise relation between predictive coding (PC) and Vector Networks (VN). The goal is to separate the shared optimization structure from the different architectural role played by the inferred variables. The comparison between predictive coding (PC) and Vector Networks (VN) is easiest to understand by separating how inference is performed from what role the inferred variables play. In both cases, fast variables are inferred under fixed learned parameters by minimizing a local objective or energy Rao and Ballard [1999], Friston [2010], Whittington and Bogacz [2017], Oliviers et al. [2025]. The key difference is architectural: in PC, the inferred variables are the dense layer activities themselves, whereas in VN the inferred variables reparameterize the transformation between dense layers. In standard sparse or predictive coding, the mapping has the form 

y = W x. (10) Writing W = [ w1, . . . , w d] in terms of its columns gives 

y = X

> j

xj wj . (11) Thus, changing the inferred activity xj gates the contribution of column wj . Inference therefore selects which input directions or features are active, but the output-side matrix W remains fixed. Put differently, PC infers the dense hidden state and only thereby determines how the fixed matrix is used; the inferred object is the layer activity itself, not an explicit parameterization of the transformation between layers. In VN, by contrast, the effective operator is synthesized from reusable rank-1 atoms: 

W ⋆(x) = X

> i

gi(x) uis⊤ 

> i

, (12) so the inter-layer transformation is first reparameterized by the sparse coefficient vector g, and inference then minimizes the layer energy with respect to that code. The coefficients gi can be viewed as latent activities, but they are more than that: each gi scales an entire rank-1 operator uis⊤ 

> i

, so the inferred code defines the sample-specific operator description between the two dense layers. Once g⋆l

is inferred, the dense upward activity hl (identified with xl+1 ) is produced directly from that settled code rather than being itself inferred as an independent dense hidden state. In this sense, VN does not merely select latent features under a fixed map, but selects and composes input–output mappings, i.e. operators. 13 The distinction can be summarized as follows: PC: y = X

> j

xj wj (column / feature selection ), (13) VN: W ⋆(x) = X

> i

gi uis⊤ 

> i

(operator selection ). (14) Thus both frameworks use iterative latent inference, but the inferred variables control different objects: PC infers dense states within a fixed mapping, whereas VN infers a sparse code that assembles the sample-specific operator itself and then yields the dense next-layer activity. The same shift can be understood more concretely from a bidirectional predictive-coding (bPC) stack. For a mapping xlWl

−−→ xl+1 , both neighboring activities xl and xl+1 are inferred in bPC. The effective use of the fixed matrix Wl is therefore jointly shaped from below by the inferred lower-layer state and from above by the inferred upper-layer state. In VN, by contrast, the dense intermediate activities are fixed-pass communication channels rather than inference variables; the model alternates dense communication layers xl with sparse inference layers gl, so information flows as xl → gl → xl+1 .This removes the shared-state coupling of bPC and assigns the layer-local transformation to one explicit sparse code. Second, the fixed dense matrix Wl is replaced by a layer-local dictionary of rank-1 operators ul,i s⊤

> l,i

,and the sample-specific transformation is assembled as 

W ⋆l (xl) = X

> i

gl,i (xl) ul,i s⊤

> l,i

. (15) Inference therefore no longer selects only neural activities under fixed weights, but selects and composes reusable operators. Crucially, this operator selection is explicitly sparse: the coefficients 

gl are inferred under an ℓ1 penalty, and at the top layer may additionally be subject to a hard top-k

budget. Only a small competitive subset of atoms therefore remains active, and a single inferred coefficient vector gl defines the operator description between the two dense layers, rather than that transformation emerging indirectly from the interaction of two inferred neighboring states. Third, the learning rule becomes weight atom local (not neuron local): 

∆Sl ∝ rxl g⊤ 

> l

, ∆Ul ∝ rhl g⊤ 

> l

. (16) In bPC, local plasticity typically takes a pre ×error or pre ×post ×error form, and the inferred activities are usually not constrained to select a sparse competitive subset of reusable operators, so updates remain distributed across adjacent weight matrices and are neuron- or pathway-local rather than weight-atom local. This distributed coupling leads to stronger weight entanglement across layers, because weight responsibility remains spread over neighboring inferred states and shared dense matrices. In VN, the inferred coefficients gl update only the atoms of their own layer, so credit assignment becomes weight-atom local to the transformation itself and more directly limits such cross-layer entanglement. In this sense, the key conceptual shift is bPC: inference on states −→ VN: inference on transformations / operators. (17) Bidirectional predictive coding therefore remains a state-inference framework: bottom-up and top-down activities are inferred under fixed forward and backward weights, and plasticity stays neuron-or pathway-local through pre ×error or pre ×post ×error interactions. VN keeps the iterative inference structure but shifts both computation and learning onto sparse reusable operator atoms: the inferred coefficient gl selects a competitive subset of rank-1 transformations and the same coefficient gates their weight-atom-local update. This is the sense in which VN turns compositionality into explicit responsibility over reusable weight structure. 

B VN vs. Transformers: Sparse Operator Inference vs. State Routing 

This section compares VN to transformer attention at the level of the adaptive variables each model uses during inference. The central distinction is between feedforward state routing in transformers and sparse operator inference in VN. 14 The comparison to transformers is useful because both architectures are input-adaptive, but the adaptive variables act on different objects. In a transformer, attention weights route information among token states: 

hattn  

> i

= X

> j

αij Vj , αij = softmax 

 q⊤ 

> i

kj

√dk



. (18) The learned projection matrices WQ, W K , W V , W O and the MLP weights are fixed for a given model during inference; the input-dependent variables αij determine which value states are read and mixed. Thus, standard attention provides a powerful form of adaptive state routing . Unlike VN, these adaptive coefficients are generated feedforward rather than inferred by energy minimization, and they are not subject to an explicit sparsity pressure or competitive selection among reusable operator atoms. 

Adaptive operator composition in VN. In VN, the input-dependent variables are sparse weight-atom coefficients. After the fast settle, the coefficients g⋆l (xl) select rank-1 atoms and compose a sample-specific operator, 

W ⋆l (xl) = X

> k

g⋆l,k (xl) ul,k s⊤

> l,k

. (19) The adaptive variable therefore specifies which reusable operators are composed by the inferred code , not only which states are read. The same inferred coefficients later gate the slow local updates on those active atoms, so computation and plasticity are organized around the same atom-level responsibility pattern. 

Low rank plays different roles. VN. Each weight atom is rank-1 in feature space, so the induced operator lies in 

W ⋆l (xl) ∈ span {ul,k s⊤

> l,k

}Kl

> k=1

. (20) Low rank constrains the operator atoms exposed after inference; sparse gains g⋆l,k (xl) compose these atoms into a sample-specific operator description. 

Transformer. For one attention head, pre-softmax scores form a bilinear token-token matrix, 

S = QK ⊤

√dk

= 1

√dkdkX

> m=1

Q(: ,m ) K⊤

> (: ,m )

. (21) This low-rank structure shapes routing capacity over tokens. Multi-head attention combines several such routing patterns, but the learned projection matrices themselves are not selected as a sparse superposition of reusable weight atoms. 

Comparison summary. Aspect VN (operators inferred from sparse atoms) Transformer (operators gener-ated by attention) 

Adaptive variable Sparse coefficients g⋆l (xl) Attention weights αij 

What it acts on Reusable rank-1 operator atoms 

ul,k s⊤

> l,k

Token/value states under fixed fea-ture projections How it is obtained Iterative sparse inference under an explicit energy and sparsity penalty Feedforward softmax attention Does it gate learning? Yes: the same coefficients later gate slow local updates on active atoms No: attention weights route com-putation only 

Competition during inference. Transformer attention weights are generated feedforward and normalized by softmax, so they redistribute mass over available states but do not arise from an explicit sparse energy minimization over reusable operator atoms. In VN, by contrast, the coefficients g⋆l

are obtained by minimizing a sparsity-regularized energy, so weight atoms compete directly for responsibility under an explicit code budget. 15 Conceptual summary. The core distinction is that transformers generate input-dependent state-mixing operators feedforward, whereas VN infers a sparse, competitive composition of reusable rank-1 operator atoms. In VN, the converged coefficients g⋆l (xl) select one sample-specific operator from the span 

Wl =

n X 

> k

gk ul,k s⊤ 

> l,k

g ∈ RKl

o

. (22) The same coefficients then gate the corresponding slow local updates. Transformer attention, by con-trast, adapts computation by redistributing activity over states under fixed feature-space projections, without a matching responsibility-gated operator update. Low-rank structure therefore plays different roles: it governs operator composition and responsibility-gated plasticity in VN, and state routing in transformers. 

C Fast Inference of Weight Atom Coefficients in Deep Vector Networks 

This section explains how a deep VN settles through hierarchical recurrent sparse inference. The key point is that layers are not fully optimized one at a time; instead, sparse coefficient updates are interleaved across the hierarchy through repeated upward and downward sweeps until the full stack reaches a consistent fixed point. For layer l, the energy is 

El(gl | xl, h l, target ) = 12 ∥xl − Slgl∥22 + λl∥gl∥1 + 12 ∥hl, target − Ulgl∥22. (23) The smooth part fl(z) = 12 ∥xl − Slz∥2 + 12 ∥hl, target − Ulz∥2 has gradient 

∇fl(z) = S⊤ 

> l

(Slz − xl) + U ⊤ 

> l

(Ulz − hl, target ), (24) where the U term is omitted when hl, target is not defined (top layer). A proximal-gradient update is then 

z ← prox ηλ l∥·∥ 1 (z − η ∇fl(z)) = soft( z − η ∇fl(z), ηλ l) . (25) Choosing η ≤ 1/L with L = ∥ S⊤ 

> l

Sl + U ⊤ 

> l

Ul ∥2 yields a descent step for the coupled update. In practice we use ηl ≈ 1/L ; during the first sweep, before top-down targets have been refreshed, we optionally use a bottom-up-only step size ηs,l ≈ 1/∥S⊤ 

> l

Sl∥2. When a fixed code budget is required, the proximal update may be followed by a hard Top-k projection, as in Eq. (6) . Thus each layer update is an ISTA/FISTA-style sparse inference step on gl, not a full layerwise convergence before the next layer is touched. The settle therefore proceeds as a distributed hierarchical recurrent process. Starting at the bottom layer, one sparse update step is taken for g1; the resulting dense upward message h1 = ϕ1(U1g1),identified with the next-layer input x2, is then propagated upward so that layer 2 can take one sparse update step, and so on until the top layer is reached. The process then reverses direction: top-down targets are refreshed, hl, target ← Sl+1 gl+1 , and the same kind of sparse update is applied during a downward sweep. One complete upward and downward traversal constitutes a single inference sweep, and the network settles through many such recurrent sweeps rather than by solving each layer in isolation. Operationally, this resembles a recurrent encoder–decoder settle: activity first propagates upward toward progressively sparser codes, then reconstructed top-down targets are sent back down to refine the lower-layer coefficients. The analogy is only heuristic, however, because both passes are part of one coupled sparse inference dynamics rather than separate feedforward encoder and decoder networks. Different schedules for this recurrent inference are possible. The simplest schedule, and the one closest to the implementation described in the main text, updates each layer once per upward pass and once per downward pass. More asynchronous variants are also possible: once a lower layer has been initialized, it can continue receiving recurrent ISTA/FISTA updates while higher layers are still being initialized, so that by the time the top layer is reached, lower layers may already have undergone several refinement steps. More generally, after an initial feedforward initialization, one can transition into a fully recurrent regime in which all layers are updated continuously at every inference time step. In all cases, the best way to understand the VN settle is as a coupled hierarchical recurrent inference dynamics in which sparse operator coefficients across all layers gradually co-adapt until the hierarchy reaches a consistent fixed point. 16 Other first-order variants (including accelerated proximal-gradient updates) are equally applicable as heuristic solvers with energy tracking and optional accept/reject safeguards Beck and Teboulle [2009]. The L1 term provides the main sparsity pressure that encourages weight-atom selection. In our experiments, hidden-layer sparsity is controlled by the soft-thresholding update itself, while any strict hard support cap is reserved for the top layer. We usually initialize gl = 0 and hl, target = 0 , but the implementation also supports warm starts, resumed code states, and optional nonzero random initialization. 

D Slow Local Dictionary Updates: The Atomic-Hebb Rule 

This section derives the Atomic-Hebb local dictionary update, i.e. the residual ×atom-coefficient rule used after the fast settle. Here g⋆l denotes the converged sparse code after fast inference has settled. The key point is that this plasticity is weight-atom local: each reusable operator atom is updated only through its own inferred coefficient and the residual available at that layer. With g⋆l fixed after the fast settle, the reconstruction term has gradient 

∇Sl 

> 12

∥xl − Slg⋆l ∥22 = −(xl − Slg⋆l ) ( g⋆l )⊤ = − rxl (g⋆l )⊤, (26) and the top-down term has gradient (when defined) 

∇Ul 

> 12

∥hl, target − Ulg⋆l ∥22 = −(hl, target − Ulg⋆l ) ( g⋆l )⊤ = − rhl (g⋆l )⊤. (27) Taking a direct gradient step on (Sl, U l) yields the local residual ×atom-coefficient updates used in Sec. 3.4. The subtle but important point is that Atomic-Hebb is not fully independent per atom in the strict sense, because the residuals 

rxl = xl − X

> j

g⋆l,j sl,j , rhl = hl, target − X

> j

g⋆l,j ul,j (28) depend on the full sparse reconstruction and therefore on all active atoms. The update is therefore not 

∆A(l,i ) ∼ local information of atom i (29) in isolation. The key point instead is that credit assignment is localized at the level of operator responsibility . The coefficient g⋆l,i determines which atom participated and how strongly it contributed, while the residual measures how much unexplained error remains after the joint sparse explanation. Column-wise, the rule can therefore be read as 

∆sl,i ∝ g⋆l,i rxl , ∆ul,i ∝ g⋆l,i rhl . (30) Every active atom sees the same layer-local residual field, but scaled by its own sparse responsibility. This is fundamentally different from backpropagation or predictive coding, where the update of a weight depends on correlations between activities of different layers, schematically 

∆Wl ∼ δl+1 x⊤ 

> l

, (31) where δl+1 denotes the output error or upstream error signal carried by the next layer’s activities. In VN, the update acts only on atoms of one layer, and each atom is weighted by its own inferred coefficient g⋆l,i . The rule is therefore not “fully atom-independent,” because the shared residual still depends on the joint sparse explanation, but credit assignment is localized at the level of operator responsibility. This is closely analogous to sparse coding itself: atoms compete to explain the input, the residual reflects the remaining unexplained signal, and only active atoms receive credit. The important distinction is therefore not that each atom learns in total isolation, but that the interaction is within-layer, reconstruction-based, sparse, and competitive, rather than cross-layer, state-sharing, or dependent on gradient transport through multiple transformations. That is why the rule is still meaningfully layer-local and weight-atom-local even though the residual is shared. In the implementation, the same residual ×atom-coefficient terms are used as local gradients for Adam, followed by per-column renormalization (and optional DC removal in pixel space). 

Renormalization and DC removal. After each update, columns of Sl and Ul are renormalized to unit norm. For pixel-space dictionaries (e.g. 16 ×16 patches) we optionally remove the DC component (the mean / zero-frequency content) of each Sl column before renormalization. These procedural constraints play the role of gain/variance control and keep sparsity statistics well-defined. 17 E Theoretical Foundations and Proofs 

This section collects the main formal statements underlying the Vector Network architecture. It covers compositional reconstruction, the Atomic-Hebbian update, convergence of fast inference, capacity bounds, and the role of top-down coupling. We provide formal derivations and discussions for five core elements of the Vector Network archi-tecture: (1) why linear sparse reconstruction algebraically guarantees compositional generalization under superposition, (2) why the local Atomic-Hebbian updates are exact gradients of the equilibrium energy, (3) convergence guarantees of the fast inference dynamics, (4) the effective capacity bounds induced by sparse weight-atom inference, and (5) the top-down coupling viewed as predictive coding. Where relevant we also note gaps between the idealized theory and the practical implementation. 

E.1 Compositional Generalization via Linear Sparse Reconstruction 

The core empirical result motivating this section is that VNs generalize zero-shot to novel combi-nations of mechanisms, such as multi-bump superpositions or mixed-force OOD cases, whereas dense and factorized models fail. We formalize this in two parts: first, the algebraic preservation of superposition through the linear decoder; second, the conditions under which sparse inference recovers the correct composition. 

Part 1: Superposition preservation. The VN reconstructs its output as a linear combination of dictionary atoms: ˆy = PKi=1 gisi = Sg. This reconstruction is linear in the code g, which immediately yields: 

Proposition 1 (Superposition Preservation) . Let g1, g2 ∈ RK be sparse codes that produce outputs 

ˆy1 = Sg1 and ˆy2 = Sg2 respectively. Then the code g1 + g2 produces the exact superposition: 

S(g1 + g2) = Sg1 + Sg2 = ˆ y1 + ˆ y2 (32) 

Proof. Immediate from linearity of matrix multiplication: S(g1 + g2) = Sg1 + Sg2.The key insight is that any nonlinear decoder, including standard CNN decoders and factorized outer-product architectures, breaks this identity. For a nonlinear decoder D, the output D(g1 + g2)̸ =

D(g1) + D(g2) in general, and compositional generalization becomes architecture-dependent rather than guaranteed. For the outer-product factorized decoder specifically, the rank-1 output f (x) g(y) applied to a superimposed input (x1+x2, y1+y2) necessarily produces N 2 cross-terms instead of N correct terms, as demonstrated in Section 4.1. 

Part 2: Sparse recovery of novel compositions. Proposition 1 guarantees that if the correct composite code g1 + g2 is found, the output is exact. The remaining question is whether inference can find this code when the composition was never seen during training. 

Setup. Let the true generative process be y = PCj=1 cj W (j) 

> true

x where c ∈ { 0, 1}C indicates active mechanisms. Assume the dictionary contains atoms A(i) ≈ W (j) 

> true

for each mechanism j. Define the dynamic dictionary Φ(x) ∈ Rm×K with columns Φi(x) = A(i)x. Theorem 1 below analyses recovery for this idealized output-side objective; it provides a guide to when sparse recovery succeeds rather than a literal analysis of VN’s implemented layer-local energy ( 12 ∥x − Sg ∥2 + 12 ∥htarget −

U g ∥2 + λ∥g∥1, Eq. (3)). 

Theorem 1 (Exact Compositional Recovery) . Let μ(Φ(x)) denote the mutual coherence: μ =max i̸=j |Φ⊤    

> iΦj|∥Φi∥∥ Φj∥

. Assume (a) the dictionary atoms approximate the true mechanisms with bounded residual error e, and (b) λ is chosen with λ ≳ ∥Φ⊤e∥∞. If the number of active OOD mechanisms 

kOOD = ∥cOOD ∥0 satisfies 

kOOD < 12



1 + 1

μ(Φ(x)) 



, (33) 

then the L1-regularized inference g⋆ = arg min g 12 ∥y − Φ(x)g∥22 + λ∥g∥1 recovers the true sparse support of cOOD .

18 Conditions under which assumptions (a) and (b) hold in practice are discussed in Remark 1. 

Proof. The coherence bound is the Exact Recovery Condition for Basis Pursuit Donoho and Elad [2003], Tropp [2004]. In the noiseless equality-constrained case the L1 relaxation matches the L0

combinatorial minimum exactly; in the noisy LASSO regime, support recovery further requires the regularizer to dominate the residual, λ ≳ ∥Φ⊤e∥∞, which is the role of assumption (b). 

Remark 1 (Conditions and limitations) . Theorem 1 requires two conditions that are not automatically satisfied: (i) Dictionary quality: The atoms must faithfully represent the true mechanisms. In practice, this depends on the Atomic-Hebbian learning dynamics (Section E.2) and sufficient training data covering each mechanism individually. (ii) Coherence: For the rank-1 atoms A(i) = uis⊤ 

> i

, the columns of the dynamic dictionary factorize as Φi(x) = ( s⊤ 

> i

x) ui, so the scalar projections cancel during normalization and 

μ(Φ(x)) = μ(U ) is independent of the test input (modulo signs of the projections). The coherence condition therefore reduces to a static incoherence requirement on the output dictionary U , which holds generically when atoms encode distinct mechanisms with different spatial/spectral signatures. The practical implication is that compositional generalization is an emergent consequence of suc-cessful dictionary learning and sufficient mechanism diversity, not an unconditional architectural guarantee. 

E.2 Atomic-Hebbian Updates as Exact Implicit Gradients 

The VN updates its dictionary S using a local rule ∆S ∝ rx(g⋆)⊤ (residual × activations) without backpropagating through the iterative inference solver. The result that such residual-times-code rules are the exact implicit gradient of an equilibrium energy is a long-established envelope-theorem argument in sparse coding Olshausen and Field [1996], online dictionary learning Mairal et al. [2009], and deep equilibrium models Bai et al. [2019]; we restate it here for completeness because it is what underlies the locality of the Atomic-Hebbian update and the validity of treating fast inference as a black box during slow learning. 

Setup. Let the layer energy be E(g, S) = f (g, S) + λ∥g∥1 with smooth component f (g, S) =  

> 12

∥x − Sg∥22. Inference finds g⋆(S) = arg min g E(g, S), and learning minimizes L(S) = 

E(g⋆(S), S).

Theorem 2 (Exact Implicit Gradients via Danskin’s Theorem) . Assume: (i) the columns of S are in general position (no d+1 columns lie on a common hyperplane), ensuring the LASSO minimizer 

g⋆(S) is unique Tibshirani [2013]; (ii) the smooth component f (g, S) is jointly continuous in (g, S).Then: dL

dS = ∂f (g, S)

∂S g=g⋆

= −rx(g⋆)⊤ (34) 

where rx = x − Sg⋆ is the reconstruction residual. Proof. The objective E(g, S) is non-smooth in g because of the L1 term, so the classical chain rule does not apply directly. Instead, the optimality of g⋆(S) gives the subgradient condition 

0 ∈ ∂gE(g⋆, S), where ∂g denotes the subdifferential. Under assumptions (i)–(ii), the gen-eralized Danskin’s theorem Danskin [1967], Bertsekas [1999] applies: the total derivative of 

L(S) = E(g⋆(S), S) reduces to the partial derivative of the smooth component f at the optimum, 

dL

dS = ∂f ∂S g=g⋆

= −(x − Sg⋆)( g⋆)⊤ = −rx(g⋆)⊤. (35) The Atomic-Hebbian update ∆S ∝ rx(g⋆)⊤ is therefore exact gradient descent on the equilibrium energy, not a heuristic approximation. 

Remark 2 (Extension to U) . The same argument applies to the lateral dictionary U via the upper-consistency energy 12 ∥htarget − U g∥2, yielding ∆U ∝ rh(g⋆)⊤. For the full VN energy combining 

19 both terms, the Atomic-Hebbian updates on S and U correspond to block coordinate descent on the equilibrium landscape. 

Remark 3 (Biological plausibility) . The update depends only on quantities locally available at the neuron: the reconstruction residual rx (error signal) and the converged activation g⋆ (post-synaptic activity). No backward pass through the inference dynamics is required, making Atomic-Hebb compatible with the locality usually associated with Hebbian plasticity Oja [1982]. 

Remark 4 (Why Atomic-Hebbian updates generalize while backprop memorizes) . Theorem 2 proves that the Atomic-Hebbian update is the correct gradient of the equilibrium energy, but does not explain why the resulting dictionary generalizes OOD while a backprop-trained linear decoder with identical architecture memorizes (Section 4.1). We offer the following intuition. The Atomic-Hebbian rule ∆S ∝ rx(g⋆)⊤ correlates residuals with activities that are themselves computed from the same dictionary via sparse inference. This self-consistency couples the learning signal to the dictionary’s current representational structure: atoms are updated to reduce error in directions that the dictionary already spans. Baldi and Hornik [1989] showed that for linear networks, such local update rules converge to global optima of the reconstruction objective without the saddle-point issues of generic gradient descent, providing a partial theoretical basis for why the dictionary is well-conditioned. More recently, Whittington and Bogacz [2017] proved that inference-then-Hebbian-update in predictive coding networks can approximate backpropagation under specific structural conditions, suggesting the two learning rules share fixed points but may differ in their convergence basins and implicit regularization. In the VN, the two-phase structure, infer first, then update only the selected atoms, imposes an implicit curriculum: the dictionary can only learn what the sparse inference can already partially represent, preventing the global task-loss memorization that plagues end-to-end backpropagation. A complete characterization of this implicit regularization, and why it favors compositionally generalizable dictionaries, remains an open theoretical question. 

E.3 Convergence of Fast Inference Setup. The layer-local energy is: 

El(gl) = 12 ∥xl − Slgl∥22 + 12 ∥hl, target − Ulgl∥22

| {z }

> fl(gl)

+λl∥gl∥1 (36) 

Theorem 3 (Convergence of Proximal Gradient Inference) . The ISTA update g(t+1)  

> l

=prox ηlλl∥·∥ 1

 g(t) 

> l

− ηl∇fl(g(t) 

> l

) with step size ηl ≤ L−1, where L = ∥S⊤ 

> l

Sl + U ⊤ 

> l

Ul∥2 is the Lipschitz constant of ∇fl, satisfies: 

El(g(t+1)  

> l

) ≤ El(g(t) 

> l

) − 12ηl

∥g(t+1)  

> l

− g(t) 

> l

∥22, (37) 

so the energy decreases monotonically and converges to the global minimum at rate O(1 /t ) in the objective error. Using FISTA acceleration Beck and Teboulle [2009], the objective-error rate improves to O(1 /t 2), although the accelerated variant does not preserve per-iteration monotone descent. Proof. The smooth component fl is convex quadratic with Hessian ∇2fl = S⊤ 

> l

Sl + U ⊤ 

> l

Ul. Its gradient is L-Lipschitz with L = λmax (∇2fl). The descent lemma for proximal gradient methods Beck and Teboulle [2009] gives the stated inequality for ηl ≤ 1/L . Since El is bounded below and monotonically non-increasing, the iterates converge to a fixed point. Convexity of El ensures this fixed point is the global minimum. Convergence rates follow from [Beck and Teboulle, 2009, Theorems 3.1 and 4.4]. 

Remark 5 (Soft-k vs. hard-k regimes) . Theorem 3 covers the soft-k regime (pure proximal ℓ1,Eq. (5) ), used in our experiments at hidden layers. The hard-k regime of Eq. (6) , applied at the top layer when a strict cardinality budget is required, composes the proximal step with a top-k projection. This introduces a non-convex constraint ∥g∥0 ≤ k, so convergence to the global optimum is no longer guaranteed; the solver may converge to a stationary point of the combinatorial problem. We note three points: 

20 (i) The energy still decreases monotonically at each step (the top-k projection is a valid proximal operator for the indicator function of the ℓ0 ball), ensuring convergence to a stationary point. (ii) For sufficiently incoherent dictionaries, the soft-k and hard-k regimes select the same support Tropp [2004], so the two regimes are equivalent under well-conditioned dictionaries. (iii) Our multi-layer settling interleaves updates across layers (block coordinate descent), which inherits the monotone descent property layer-by-layer but lacks a global convergence rate guarantee for the joint objective. The closest theoretical reference is the multi-layer convolutional sparse coding framework of Sulam et al. [2018], which provides convergence guarantees for a related hierarchical pursuit under incoherence conditions; extending those results to the VN’s bidirectional ( S/U ) atom structure is an open problem. 

E.4 Effective Capacity Bound 

Standard dense layers deploy their entire parameter budget for every input. We show that the VN’s sparse inference structurally restricts the per-sample hypothesis space. 

Proposition 2 (Rank Bound for the Synthesized Operator) . For any input x, let W ⋆(x) =

U diag( g⋆) S⊤ denote the operator synthesized from the inferred sparse code. Its rank is bounded by the activation sparsity: 

rank( W ⋆(x)) ≤ ∥ g⋆∥0 ≤ k (38) 

where k is the top-k sparsity constraint. The corresponding per-sample parameter budget is bounded by k(d + m), compared to md for a dense layer. Proof. W ⋆ = U diag( g⋆) S⊤. By sub-multiplicativity: rank( W ⋆) ≤ rank(diag( g⋆)) = ∥g⋆∥0 ≤

k.This rank bound characterizes the sample-specific operator induced by the inferred sparse code, not a literal forward multiplication W ⋆(x)x.

Remark 6 (Capacity and reuse) . The condition k ≪ md m+d (where d is the input dimension and m

the output dimension) ensures that the per-sample transformation is strictly lower-rank than what a dense layer could represent. Combined with a shared dictionary learned across all training samples, this forces the slow learning phase to discover reusable, compositionally generalizable atoms rather than sample-specific memorization patterns. From a statistical learning perspective, the Rademacher complexity of k-sparse linear models scales as O(pk log( K/k )/n ) rather than O(pd/n ) for dense models Bartlett and Mendelson [2002], providing a formal basis for the improved generalization of sparse representations when k ≪ d.

Remark 7 (Failure conditions) . The rank constraint is also a source of failure when violated: (i) Insufficient sparsity: When the target function requires more than k independent components (e.g., a scene with k+1 superimposed objects), the VN necessarily under-fits because its effective weight matrix cannot span the required subspace. (ii) Dictionary collapse: When atoms become near-duplicate during Atomic-Hebbian learning, the mutual coherence μ(S) (defined in Theorem 1) increases and the recovery condition may be violated, causing inference to select incorrect atoms. (iii) Incomplete convergence: The practical settle uses a finite number of sweeps. If inference terminates before the energy has converged sufficiently, the code g may not satisfy the optimality conditions required by Theorems 2 and 1. In practice, the decorrelation step in the slow update and the energy-tracking accept/reject mechanism (Section 3.3) mitigate conditions (ii) and (iii), but do not eliminate them in the worst case. 

E.5 Top-Down Coupling 

The VN’s top-down information enters the lower-layer code gl through the consistency term  

> 12

∥hl, target − Ulgl∥22 in the layer energy El. During the downward sweep (Sec. 3.3), the target 21 is refreshed from the higher-layer reconstruction, hl, target ← Sl+1 gl+1 , and a coupled proximal step on gl uses both bottom-up and top-down residuals. 

Remark 8 (Top-down coupling via energy consistency) . The top-down term contributes the gradient component U ⊤ 

> l

(Ulgl − hl, target ) to the smooth part of El, so the proximal updates of Eqs. (5) –

(6) automatically incorporate a top-down correction whenever hl, target has been refreshed. This integrates predictive-coding-style top-down information directly into the energy descent rather than as a separate update rule. Unlike classical predictive coding Rao and Ballard [1999], the VN does not enforce strict weight transport between forward and backward pathways. The lateral dictionary Ul used in the top-down consistency term is learned independently from any forward Jacobian; implementations may also use untied dictionaries for the upward message and the downward consistency, in which case the top-down dictionary plays a role analogous to a learned feedback weight as in the Feedback Alignment principle Lillicrap et al. [2016]. We do not prove convergence of any such alignment for the VN’s specific dynamics; an empirical ablation of the top-down coupling strength is reported in Appendix H.3. Conceptually, the VN’s fast–slow separation mirrors Deep Equilibrium Models Bai et al. [2019], where forward inference computes a fixed point and learning differentiates through the equilibrium; the key difference is that the VN uses an explicit energy function with convergence guarantees (Theorem 3) rather than implicit differentiation through a black-box fixed-point solver. 

Remark 9 (Connections to related frameworks) . The VN’s inference-learning separation connects to several established theoretical frameworks: 

• Equilibrium models: The fast-slow separation mirrors Deep Equilibrium Models Bai et al. [2019], but with an explicit energy function and convergence guarantee rather than implicit differentiation. 

• Sparse coding: The single-layer inference is equivalent to the LASSO / Basis Pursuit Chen et al. [1998], with the multi-layer extension following the hierarchical sparse coding framework of Sulam et al. [2018]. 

• Energy-based models: The overall architecture fits within the energy-based learning frame-work of LeCun et al. [2006], where inference minimizes energy and learning minimizes the minimum energy. 

• Predictive coding: The top-down coupling (Remark 8) connects to the predictive coding framework Rao and Ballard [1999], Whittington and Bogacz [2017], where higher layers predict lower-layer activity and residuals drive learning. 

F Spatial Decoding: Extended Results 

This section extends the spatial decoding benchmark from Fig. 2 with additional ablations on rank, depth, encoding, and holdout structure. The aim is to show more explicitly which parts of the VN design are responsible for the off-support robustness in the bump task. 

Increasing architectural rank does not help. A rank-N factorized model trained on rank-1 data collapses to rank-1: extra streams become redundant copies (Table 1). Table 1: Rank ablation. All trained on single bumps.                    

> Architecture N=1 OOD N=2 N=3
> Rank-1 2.0×10 −57.3×10 −31.1×10 −2
> Rank-2 3.0×10 −57.8×10 −31.1×10 −2
> Rank-3 2.6×10 −58.1×10 −31.2×10 −2
> Full 2D VN 4.0×10 −33.7×10 −44.4×10 −4

VN architecture ablation. Table 2: depth 2 captures most benefit over depth 1; k=8 outper-forms k=16 (sparser codes compose better); mix =0 .7 improves VN-3L by 23% because the deeper hierarchy benefits from stronger top-down refinement of reconstruction codes. 22 Table 2: VN depth, sparsity, and top-down ablation. 

Config Depth k Ratio N =2 N =3 

VN-1L 1 16 1.16 × 2.65 ×10 −4 3.01 ×10 −4

VN-2L 2 8 1.08 × 9.53 ×10 −5 9.88 ×10 −5

VN-3L 3 8 1.07 × 9.93 ×10 −5 1.01 ×10 −4

VN-3L (mix = 0 .7) 3 8 1.06 × 7.62 ×10 −5 7.76 ×10 −5

Input encoding comparison. Table 3 shows all encoding ×model combinations. Fourier features benefit all models, with VN-1L improving 5× and the SAE improving 10 × over bump. The β-VAE benefits most from Fourier-14 ( 2.4×10 −4). The SAE shows dramatic encoding sensitivity (from 

1.8×10 −2 to 4.2×10 −4), while VN-3L is robust across all encodings ( 5.5−7.4×10 −5). Table 3: Full encoding comparison (N =2 OOD -1 MSE). 

Encoding (dim) SAE β-VAE ( β=1 ) β-VAE ( β=4 ) VN-1L VN-3L Bump (56) 4.37 ×10 −3 4.75 ×10 −4 8.22 ×10 −4 2.93 ×10 −4 6.90 ×10 −5

One-hot (56) 4.76 ×10 −3 5.52 ×10 −4 5.95 ×10 −4 3.02 ×10 −4 7.43 ×10 −5

Fourier-14 (56) 4.24 ×10 −4 2.38 ×10 −4 4.88 ×10 −4 6.29 ×10 −5 5.49 ×10 −5

Fourier-7 (28) 3.60 ×10 −3 2.69 ×10 −4 3.36 ×10 −4 5.93 ×10 −5 5.90 ×10 −5

Scalar (2) 1.81 ×10 −2 1.42 ×10 −3 1.72 ×10 −3 1.04 ×10 −3 6.56 ×10 −5

Sharper bumps ( σ=0 .5). Table 4: the Full 2D VN holds at 1.08 × ratio; on N =2 sharp bumps it is 7.5× more precise than ML-Fact. VN. Table 4: σ=0 .5: single-bump (left) and N =2 (right). 

Model OOD /ID N =2 OOD -1 CNN 3.39 × 3.09 ×10 −3

Fiete Fact. 1.05 × 4.29 ×10 −3

ML-Fact. VN 0.97 × 2.08 ×10 −3

Full 2D VN 1.08 × 2.71 ×10 −4

Annular holdout. Ring-shaped OOD : Full 2D VN 1.04 ×, CNN 4.57 ×.

Emergent factorization. Removing hand-built components step by step (supervised S → Hebbian 

→ no axis loss → flat 2D dict) preserves compositional generalization at every stage ( 1.31 × → 

1.56 × → 1.47 × → 1.19 ×). 

Entangled input. When input =output (784-D flattened image), all models solve N =2 trivially (∼10 −5) because composition reduces to autoencoding. The challenge requires a dimensionality mismatch (56-D → 784-D). 

G Function Composition: Extended Results 

This section extends the function-composition results from Fig. 3 with full metric grids, qualitative Hard-OOD examples, and masked-inference details. This appendix contains two blocks of supporting material: (i) the full evaluation grids behind both protocols – reconstruction (Appendix G.1) and masked prediction (Appendix G.2); (ii) qualitative-reconstruction galleries for both protocols (Appendix G.3) and algorithmic details of masked-FISTA inference (Appendix G.4). 23 G.1 Full Reconstruction Grid (Clean Training) 

Table 5 reports the per-model, per-difficulty reconstruction MSE underlying the bars summarized in Fig. 3b. The masked-prediction counterpart appears in Table 6 and qualitative galleries for both protocols are collected in App. G.3. 

Model ID Easy Hard NeuralODE 2.16 × 10 −1 1.20 1.44 

rSLDS 1.82 × 10 −1 1.12 1.18 

DeepAE3 1.90 × 10 −4 3.37 × 10 −1 4.30 × 10 −1

SparseAE3 3.53 × 10 −4 2.71 × 10 −1 3.71 × 10 −1

RNN 5.61 × 10 −4 1.72 × 10 −2 5.34 × 10 −2

VN-1L 2.76 × 10 −2 4.26 × 10 −2 7.18 × 10 −2

Transformer 2.1 × 10 −5 2.7 × 10 −4 1.5 × 10 −3

Mamba-bottleneck 4.60 × 10 −5 1.69 × 10 −2 1.89 × 10 −2

VN-5L 7.80 × 10 −5 1.59 × 10 −4 4.21 × 10 −3

VN-3L 9.60 × 10 −5 1.73 × 10 −4 4.16 × 10 −3

Mamba 1.60 × 10 −5 3.05 × 10 −4 8.22 × 10 −4

Table 5: Full Function-Composition reconstruction grid (clean training; per-model, per-difficulty MSE). 

G.2 Full Mask-Prediction Grid (Clean Training) 

Table 6 reports the mean masked MSE for every (model, mask regime, difficulty) cell at Tier 1 ( n=600 

test samples, clean training). All VN numbers use masked-FISTA inference with nouter =5 ; all other models receive the masked input with zeroed positions. The MASK _FORECAST _25/Hard-OOD column corresponds to the masked-prediction bars summarized in Fig. 3c. 

> MASK

_FORECAST _25 MASK _FORECAST _50 Model ID Easy Hard ID Easy Hard 

VN-3L 5.50 × 10 −1 8.06 × 10 −1 3.91e-1 8.84 × 10 −1 9.38 × 10 −1 6.22e-1 VN-5L 5.50 × 10 −1 8.04 × 10 −1 3.92e-1 8.85 × 10 −1 9.37 × 10 −1 6.22e-1 

VN-1L 3.15 × 10 −1 5.90 × 10 −1 5.81 × 10 −1 8.24 × 10 −1 8.86 × 10 −1 7.73 × 10 −1

Mamba-bottleneck 5.40 × 10 −1 8.72 × 10 −1 6.24 × 10 −1 7.82 × 10 −1 9.80 × 10 −1 7.36 × 10 −1

RNN 6.88 × 10 −1 8.25 × 10 −1 1.23 8.08 × 10 −1 9.50 × 10 −1 8.21 × 10 −1

DeepAE3 1.76 × 10 −1 7.34 × 10 −1 1.49 5.22 × 10 −1 1.01 9.46 × 10 −1

SparseAE3 1.80 × 10 −1 6.73 × 10 −1 1.51 5.37 × 10 −1 9.87 × 10 −1 8.95 × 10 −1

Transformer 1.22 9.68 × 10 −1 1.48 1.07 1.00 9.57 × 10 −1

Mamba 1.34 9.80 × 10 −1 1.76 1.11 1.01 1.14 

NeuralODE 1.92 1.61 1.27 2.16 1.91 1.25 

rSLDS 1.92 1.56 2.34 2.11 2.17 2.15 

> MASK

_RANDOM _30 MASK _BLOCK _128 Model ID Easy Hard ID Easy Hard 

VN-3L 6.61 × 10 −3 5.71 × 10 −3 1.31 × 10 −2 4.59 × 10 −1 6.92 × 10 −1 2.97e-1 VN-5L 5.56 × 10 −3 4.58 × 10 −3 1.20e-2 4.42 × 10 −1 6.79 × 10 −1 3.04 × 10 −1

VN-1L 8.49 × 10 −2 8.36 × 10 −2 1.71 × 10 −1 2.84 × 10 −1 4.10 × 10 −1 5.12 × 10 −1

Mamba-bottleneck 1.83 × 10 −2 4.20 × 10 −2 4.35 × 10 −2 5.36 × 10 −1 8.21 × 10 −1 4.82 × 10 −1

RNN 9.65 × 10 −2 1.36 × 10 −1 2.21 × 10 −1 5.06 × 10 −1 7.82 × 10 −1 6.91 × 10 −1

DeepAE3 5.41 × 10 −2 3.85 × 10 −1 5.71 × 10 −1 2.02 × 10 −1 7.23 × 10 −1 7.90 × 10 −1

SparseAE3 5.44 × 10 −2 3.81 × 10 −1 5.25 × 10 −1 1.97 × 10 −1 6.96 × 10 −1 7.58 × 10 −1

Transformer 2.46 × 10 −1 2.36 × 10 −1 2.33 × 10 −1 8.12 × 10 −1 9.59 × 10 −1 7.62 × 10 −1

Mamba 2.35 × 10 −1 2.33 × 10 −1 2.40 × 10 −1 9.00 × 10 −1 9.95 × 10 −1 8.18 × 10 −1

NeuralODE 1.00 1.43 1.41 9.65 × 10 −1 1.60 1.92 

rSLDS 6.74 × 10 −1 1.40 1.11 7.99 × 10 −1 1.66 2.12 

Table 6: Full Function-Composition mask-prediction grid (mean masked MSE, clean training, 

n=600 ). Rows ordered by the main-paper ranking on MASK _FORECAST _25/Hard. Bold: best entry per (regime, difficulty) column in the Hard-OOD block. VN is the top-2 on every Hard-OOD cell; on MASK _RANDOM _30/Hard the margin is roughly two orders of magnitude over the autoencoder family. 24 G.3 Hard-OOD Qualitative Galleries 

Aggregated MSE numbers in Tables 5 and 6 establish that the VN stacks lead the Hard-OOD block, but they do not reveal how the non-VN baselines fail. Two qualitatively different failure modes can produce similar mean MSEs (e.g. uniform shrinkage to the dataset mean vs. tracking the gross shape but losing high-frequency content), and these have different implications for what the model has actually learned. The galleries below inspect representative worst-case non-VN samples to surface per-baseline failure signatures. Figures 6–7 show the reconstruction-protocol qualitative behavior. The single-example figure is the Hard-OOD sample on which the gap between VN and the three non-VN principled baselines (M AMBA -BOTTLENECK , D EEP AE3, RNN) is largest under clean reconstruction; the gallery extends this to four samples over the full 10-model roster. Across all four, D EEP AE3 collapses to a mean / linear interpolant, the RNN traces a low-frequency envelope, and M AMBA -BOTTLENECK follows the gross signal shape but misses the high-frequency detail, while both VN stacks track within the visible line width. 1 

> 0
> 1
> Target
> MSE=2.41e-04
> VN-3L (A2A)
> MSE=6.18e-05
> VN-5L (A2A)
> MSE=3.39e-03
> Mamba-bottleneck
> MSE=4.16e-01
> DeepAE3
> MSE=3.85e-02
> RNN
> MSE=1.00e-04
> Transformer
> Function Composition | Hard-OOD example #315 (VN-5L dominates; others fail)

Figure 6: Hard-OOD reconstruction (single worst non-VN sample) . Sample selected as 

arg max i ρi with ρi=mean(MSE non −VN )/MSE VN-5L .1

> 0
> 1
> sample #315
> [#315] Target
> MSE=2.41e-04
> VN-3L (A2A)
> MSE=6.18e-05
> VN-5L (A2A)
> MSE=3.39e-03
> Mamba-bottleneck
> MSE=4.16e-01
> DeepAE3
> MSE=3.85e-02
> RNN
> MSE=1.00e-04
> Transformer
> 2
> 0
> sample #388
> Target
> MSE=1.70e-04
> VN-3L (A2A)
> MSE=1.91e-04
> VN-5L (A2A)
> MSE=6.01e-03
> Mamba-bottleneck
> MSE=9.45e-01
> DeepAE3
> MSE=7.85e-02
> RNN
> MSE=4.93e-04
> Transformer
> 1
> 0
> 1
> sample #296
> Target
> MSE=1.80e-04
> VN-3L (A2A)
> MSE=1.95e-04
> VN-5L (A2A)
> MSE=5.02e-03
> Mamba-bottleneck
> MSE=9.64e-01
> DeepAE3
> MSE=5.62e-02
> RNN
> MSE=1.11e-04
> Transformer
> 1
> 0
> 1
> sample #202
> Target
> MSE=2.02e-04
> VN-3L (A2A)
> MSE=1.38e-04
> VN-5L (A2A)
> MSE=2.13e-03
> Mamba-bottleneck
> MSE=6.52e-01
> DeepAE3
> MSE=3.34e-02
> RNN
> MSE=1.04e-04
> Transformer
> Function Composition | Hard-OOD gallery: VN-5L vs baselines

Figure 7: Hard-OOD reconstruction gallery (four worst-case non-VN samples). Figure 8 reports the mask-protocol counterpart of the reconstruction gallery. Three Hard-OOD samples are chosen by ρmask 

i = mean(MSE mask non −VN )/MSE mask 

VN-5L on the hidden positions and the same mild ID-outlier filter as in the main paper. On every row both VN stacks track the signal closely through the masked tail; the autoencoder family collapses, latent- dynamics models drift off the signal entirely, and both Mamba variants catch the early observed part but diverge once the mask hides the tail. The non-VN failures are not a single uniform phenomenon: each baseline class has its own qualitative signature (D EEP AE3 mean collapse, RNN low-frequency envelope, M AMBA -BOTTLENECK shape-without-detail; under masking, autoencoders collapse on the hidden tail and Mamba variants diverge once the observation window ends). The aggregate MSE gap therefore reflects different underlying inductive biases rather than a uniform quantitative gap. Both VN stacks consistently track the signal within the visible line width across both protocols, which matches the quantitative ranking in Tables 5–6. 25 2                                  

> 0
> 2
> #80
> win=14.5
> Target
> hidden: 1.35e-01
> obs: 5.48e-02
> VN-1L
> hidden: 4.88e-02
> obs: 2.01e-03
> VN-3L
> hidden: 4.95e-02
> obs: 1.89e-03
> VN-5L
> hidden: 4.01e-01
> obs: 5.13e-01
> DeepAE3
> hidden: 4.31e-01
> obs: 2.71e-01
> SparseAE3
> hidden: 2.19e-01
> obs: 4.75e-02
> RNN
> hidden: 2.85e-01
> obs: 1.39e-04
> Mamba
> hidden: 2.44e-01
> obs: 4.05e-02
> Mamba-bottleneck
> hidden: 1.32e+00
> obs: 1.72e+00
> NeuralODE
> hidden: 2.13e+00
> obs: 1.08e+00
> rSLDS
> hidden: 2.64e-01
> obs: 1.91e-03
> Transformer
> 2
> 0
> 2
> #112
> win=12.8
> hidden: 3.06e-01
> obs: 8.20e-02
> hidden: 7.07e-02
> obs: 6.09e-03
> hidden: 7.19e-02
> obs: 6.01e-03
> hidden: 1.62e+00
> obs: 2.75e-01
> hidden: 1.48e+00
> obs: 3.37e-01
> hidden: 9.10e-01
> obs: 1.18e-01
> hidden: 1.05e+00
> obs: 1.51e-05
> hidden: 3.62e-01
> obs: 8.95e-02
> hidden: 6.36e-01
> obs: 2.56e-01
> hidden: 3.89e-01
> obs: 8.68e-01
> hidden: 9.00e-01
> obs: 6.47e-03
> 2
> 0
> 2
> #332
> win=12.2
> hidden: 2.46e-01
> obs: 6.55e-02
> hidden: 1.54e-01
> obs: 1.44e-02
> hidden: 1.53e-01
> obs: 1.43e-02
> hidden: 1.48e+00
> obs: 3.56e-01
> hidden: 1.42e+00
> obs: 5.28e-01
> hidden: 1.27e+00
> obs: 1.75e-01
> hidden: 1.91e+00
> obs: 8.18e-05
> hidden: 5.16e-01
> obs: 2.02e-01
> hidden: 8.02e-01
> obs: 1.33e+00
> hidden: 5.66e+00
> obs: 1.31e+00
> hidden: 1.58e+00
> obs: 1.51e-02
> Function Composition Predict | mask_forecast_25 | Hard-OOD gallery (VN-5L wins over every non-VN comparator by win_ratio)

Figure 8: Hard-OOD masked-prediction gallery (MASK _FORECAST _25). Three worst-case non-VN samples over the full ten-comparator roster. Grey curves: target; grey shading: hidden region; colored curves: model output; per-panel numbers: MSE on hidden positions and on observed positions. 

G.4 Masked-FISTA VN Inference 

For an observed signal xobs ∈ RD , mask m ∈ { 0, 1}D , and frozen VN dictionary S, the masked imputation problem is 

min 

z

12 m ⊙ (xobs − Sz ) 22 + λ ∥z∥1, (39) where the observation-mismatch loss is restricted to the observed positions and hidden positions are filled by the sparse linear synthesis Sz .Masked-FISTA VN is an outer imputation loop around the ordinary VN inference call VN_ INFER (·)

that solves Eq. (39) without retraining any VN weights (Algorithm 1). 

Algorithm 1 Masked-FISTA VN inference 

Require: Observed signal xobs ∈ RD , mask m ∈ { 0, 1}D , frozen VN stack with dictionary S, outer iterations nouter =5 

1: z(0) ← VN_ INFER (m ⊙ xobs )

2: for k = 1 , . . . , n outer do 

3: x(k) ← m ⊙ xobs + (1 − m) ⊙ S z (k−1) 

4: z(k) ← VN_ INFER (x(k))

5: end for 

6: return ˆx = S z (nouter )

At convergence, observed positions match xobs exactly and hidden positions are filled by the sparse linear synthesis S z ⋆. The fixed point coincides with the minimiser of (39) because each inner call already solves an ℓ1-regularized residual against a fully observed signal. We fix nouter =5 throughout the paper; empirically five outer steps are sufficient for the masked residual to fall below the FISTA tolerance on every VN model we tested. No VN weight is updated in this procedure, so the method transfers the reconstruction-trained dictionary to the prediction setting at a ≈ 5× inference cost and zero retraining cost. Non-VN baselines are evaluated with hidden positions set to zero, exactly matching how their recurrent / state-space / autoencoder decoders would see masked evidence in deployment. 

H n-Body Dynamics: Extended Results 

This section extends the n-body results from Fig. 4 with force-law details, rollout analyses, and additional OOD probes. These diagnostics test whether the same compositional advantages seen in one-step prediction remain visible under longer-horizon physical dynamics. This appendix consolidates the n-body force-law details: force-law definitions and design rationale (Sec. H.1), the top-down coupling ablation (Sec. H.3) and trajectory rollouts (Sec. H.4). 26 H.1 Force Law Definitions 

All simulations use five unit-mass particles in a 2D box of side length 5. Initial positions are drawn uniformly from [−2.5, 2.5] 2; initial velocities from N (0 , 0.52).The four force primitives acting on particle i due to particle j are: 

Fgrav = −G ˆrij 

(r2 

> ij

+ ϵ2) , G = 1 .0, ϵ = 0 .1 (40) 

Fspring = −k (rij − r0) ˆ rij , k = 0 .5, r 0 = 1 .0 (41) 

Fdrag = −γ vi, γ = 0 .3 (42) 

Flor = ω  −vi,y , v i,x 

, ω = 2 .0 (43) where rij = ∥ri − rj ∥ and ˆrij is the unit direction from j to i. A soft boundary dampens particles that drift beyond box size (position scaled by 0.98, velocity by 0.9). The integrator is fourth-order Runge-Kutta with ∆t = 0 .005 .

Choice of force forms. The four primitives were selected so that each carries a distinct functional class , ensuring that the compositional task tests recombination of qualitatively different interactions rather than sign- or scale-flipped variants of the same dynamics. 

Gravity (Eq. 40). A softened Newtonian 1/r 2 attraction between unit masses, the canonical long-range inverse-square force. The softening ϵ = 0 .1 removes the r → 0 singularity without altering the long-range form. 

Spring (Eq. 41). Hooke’s law with rest length r0 = 1 : linear in displacement, equilibrium-seeking, qualitatively unlike any inverse-power law, and the only primitive whose sign flips at a finite separa-tion. 

Drag (Eq. 42). Linear viscous damping in the Stokes regime: a function of the focus body’s own velocity rather than relative position, and the only dissipative primitive. This is the one force that breaks energy conservation, deliberately included to rule out approaches that assume conservative dynamics (e.g. Hamiltonian/Lagrangian neural networks). 

Lorentz rotation (Eq. 43). A velocity-dependent rotation field of the form ω(−vi,y , v i,x ). Unlike the other three primitives, this force depends directly on the current velocity rather than relative displacement, making it qualitatively distinct from gravity, spring, and drag. Its role in the benchmark is to test whether models can recombine positional and velocity-dependent mechanisms under unseen compositions without collapsing them into one shared dense interaction. 

H.2 Body-Dropout Pareto on the n-body Benchmark 

The main figure (Fig. 4) reports OOD MSE aggregated over body counts. Aggregation hides whether a model that looks competitive at training-time body count n = 5 actually holds up when bodies are dropped to n = 4 , 3, and whether degradation costs ID, OOD, or both. To expose this we plot, for each model, the joint trajectory through (Median ID, Median OOD) space as n shrinks; the resulting Pareto figure makes each baseline’s failure mode geometrically diagnosable. Figure 9 places each model at (Median ID MSE, Median OOD MSE) on log–log axes, with three points per model – one for each of n = 5 , 4, 3 – connected by a thin line. Large marker is n = 5 ,small marker n = 3 . The diagonal is the no-gap line ( OOD = ID ); points below it are structurally impossible because the OOD pool is a strict superset of the ID set. Each model traces a characteristic geometric signature: V ECTOR NETWORK (black star, lower-right) is the only model that stays in the low-OOD region as n shrinks; its trajectory barely moves. M AMBA 

(purple) blows up vertically – an excellent n = 5 ID fit but roughly two orders of magnitude OOD growth as bodies are dropped, the signature of an architecture that memorizes the training-time problem size. T RANSFORMER (brown) blows up diagonally : both ID and OOD degrade together, ID by ∼500 × and OOD by ∼3×. GNN (orange) moves horizontally – its ID error grows by ∼100 ×

while OOD barely changes, the opposite kind of memorization (training body count baked into the message passing). MLP, F ILM, and F ACTORIZED cluster mid-plot, neither winning ID nor OOD; RANDOM (grey) fixes the predict-the-mean ceiling and is by construction insensitive to n.27 Factorized Figure 9: Body-dropout Pareto on the n-body benchmark. Median ID vs. Median OOD MSE for each model, evaluated at n=5 , 4, 3 bodies (large → small marker). Aggregated MSE hides direction: most baselines that look “competitive” at fixed n collapse along a specific axis (ID, OOD, or both) as n shifts, and each axis corresponds to a recognisable failure mode. Vector Network is the only model that tolerates body dropout while remaining in the low-OOD region, evidence that the learned compositional structure does not bake the training-time problem size into the operator the network synthesizes per sample. 

H.3 Top-Down Coupling Ablation 

Recipe-development sweeps consistently identified four qualitative properties of the top-down cou-pling. First, a small global feedback weight ( λtd ≈ 0.3) yields a small but systematic OOD improve-ment at modest ID cost. Second, this benefit does not compose with dead-atom re-initialization: the two mechanisms compete for the same atom-assignment budget. Third, splitting Wtd per force backfires under the per-force training budget, since each force-specific projection sees only a quarter of the data. Fourth, the asymmetry between top-down and bottom-up coupling is real – inverting the direction degrades every metric we tracked. We therefore use λtd = 0 .3 as a single global feedback weight in all reported VN N-body results. 

H.4 Trajectory Rollout Analysis 

The N-body benchmark evaluates single-step acceleration prediction, which leaves open whether good single-step predictions actually compose into physically plausible long-horizon dynamics. Compositional generalization in this setting is only meaningful if the per-step predictions add up to stable trajectories, so we additionally roll each model forward in time and measure how the error accumulates. Starting from the true state at t = 0 , we iterate (i) construct the 22-dim per-body input features from the current predicted state, (ii) query the model for the instantaneous acceleration ˆai of each body, (iii) advance velocities and positions with fourth-order Runge-Kutta with ∆t = 0 .005 described in App. H.1, and (iv) apply the same soft-boundary damping as the simulator (position scaled by 0.98 ,28 0 200 400 600 800 1000                                                    

> Rollout step
> 10 9
> 10 7
> 10 5
> 10 3
> 10 1
> 10 1
> Position MSE
> ID: gravity
> VectorNetCanonical
> Additive
> FiLM
> GNN
> Mamba
> MLP
> 0200 400 600 800 1000
> Rollout step
> 10 8
> 10 6
> 10 4
> 10 2
> 10 0
> Position MSE
> ID: spring
> 0200 400 600 800 1000
> Rollout step
> 10 11
> 10 9
> 10 7
> 10 5
> 10 3
> 10 1
> 10 1
> Position MSE
> ID: drag
> 0200 400 600 800 1000
> Rollout step
> 10 9
> 10 7
> 10 5
> 10 3
> 10 1
> 10 1
> Position MSE
> OOD: Gravity+Spring
> 0200 400 600 800 1000
> Rollout step
> 10 9
> 10 7
> 10 5
> 10 3
> 10 1
> 10 1
> Position MSE
> OOD: Gravity+Drag
> 0200 400 600 800 1000
> Rollout step
> 10 6
> 10 0
> 10 6
> 10 12
> 10 18
> 10 24
> 10 30
> 10 36
> Position MSE
> OOD: Grav+Spring+Drag
> Position drift during rollout -- model comparison (avg over 4 sims)

Figure 10: Position drift during rollout (5 s, Runge–Kutta, avg. over 4 initial conditions, shading 

= ±1σ). Top row: ID single forces; bottom row: OOD compositions. Vector Network (blue) has the lowest average drift on five of six panels. velocity by 0.9 whenever a body drifts outside the box). This is an open-loop rollout: the model sees its own predicted state at every step, so errors compound. The rollout covers 999 steps (5 s of simulated time, 5× longer than a training sample). Figure 10 shows position MSE vs. rollout step on the ID single-force conditions (top row) and the OOD compositions (bottom row), with shading showing ±1σ over four initial conditions. Vector Network (blue) maintains the lowest drift on five of six panels, consistent with its strongest single-step accuracy on the same conditions. The Factorized baseline is the most informative counter-example: despite very low single-step MSE, it accumulates position error faster than VN after ∼ 200 

steps, because its per-force sub-networks memorise local dynamics but cannot self-correct once the accumulated state drifts outside the training distribution. The remaining baselines spread across the panels without a single model approaching VN’s drift envelope. Figure 11 visualizes ground-truth (top row) vs. model-predicted body trajectories (subsequent rows) for three OOD compositions. For each condition we select one simulation to display from 20 candidates using three filters: (i) all bodies of the ground-truth trajectory stay within 0.95 ·Lbox of the origin (no boundary damping); (ii) bodies traverse an average of at least 2 box units over the rollout (nontrivial dynamics); and (iii) among candidates that pass both, we pick the one that minimizes Vector Network’s rollout MSE – a per-condition best case for our model that nonetheless uses the same initial state for every baseline. The figures show that VN trajectories largely overlap ground truth, while baseline trajectories diverge in characteristically different ways (identity-style straight lines, boundary zig-zag, FiLM divergence). Single-step accuracy translates into long-horizon stability for Vector Network, as shown by the lowest drift on five of six drift panels and the closest qualitative match to ground truth on every OOD trajectory. The visible rollout artefacts (straight-line segments, soft-boundary zig-zag, FiLM divergence) reflect open-loop integration of single-step predictors and do not alter the relative ordering of models in Fig. 10; the trajectory figures are therefore best read as a qualitative complement to the drift curves rather than as a standalone evaluation. Crucially, the single-step vs. rollout comparison shows that low single-step MSE alone (e.g. Factorized) is not sufficient for compositional stability over long horizons. 29 I MNIST Composition: Extended Results 

This section extends the MNIST results from Fig. 5 with representation, sparsity, and convergence diagnostics. The goal is to show how the learned sparse codes use representational budget and how stable the inferred supports become during fast settling. Figure 12 provides additional diagnostics for the MNIST experiments beyond the main-paper OOD reconstruction errors. These panels quantify how the learned sparse codes use representational budget, how quickly the inferred supports stabilize during fast settling, and how sparsity changes across depth. Together they show that the MNIST VNs do not merely achieve low OOD error, but do so with progressively more selective deeper codes whose active subsets lock in reliably during inference. 

Figure 12: Extended MNIST diagnostics. (a) Explained-variance versus representational-budget curves. The left panel compares VN layers against PCA by plotting the fraction of variance explained as the number of active atoms or components increases, showing how deeper VN layers trade denser reconstructions for progressively more selective sparse codes. The right panel compares the top-layer VN against autoencoder baselines at matched representational budgets, making explicit that the VN reaches strong reconstruction quality with fewer active components than dense latent baselines. 

(b) Support stability across 120 fast-settle sweeps, measured by overlap between successive sparse supports. This panel shows how quickly the active atom set locks in during recurrent inference: early sweeps allow support reconfiguration, after which the inferred sparse code becomes stable while the residual continues to refine. (c) Layerwise sparsity statistics, reported as k95 and keff . Here 

k95 is the number of active atoms needed to recover 95% of the final explained variance, while keff 

summarizes the effective support size of the inferred code. The trend across layers shows the intended compression cascade: higher layers operate with tighter active subsets and more selective atom usage than lower layers. 

J Hardware and Storage Requirements 

This section summarizes the practical compute and storage requirements for reproducing the experi-ments in this paper. The intent is to make clear that the reported results do not rely on distributed training or unusually large hardware budgets. All experiments in this paper were run on consumer-grade single-GPU workstations. The original benchmarks were developed and evaluated on an NVIDIA RTX 2080 Ti (11 GB VRAM); subsequent runs were reproduced on a modern NVIDIA RTX 5090, which has substantial memory headroom and shortens wall-clock training time but does not change any reported result. No multi-GPU training, distributed compute, or cluster infrastructure is required. System memory of 16 GB is sufficient for every experiment in the paper; the machines we used were equipped with 64 GB, but peak working-set memory never exceeded the 16 GB budget. Disk-storage requirements are negligible: roughly 1 GB of free space is enough to hold the trained-model checkpoints, intermediate activations, diagnostic JSON bundles, and rendered figures for all experiments combined. 30 4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

OOD: Gravity+Spring 

Ground truth (sim #7) 

4 2 0 2 4

X

3

2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

> Y

OOD: Gravity+Drag 

Ground truth (sim #5) 

4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

OOD: Grav+Spring+Drag 

Ground truth (sim #11) 

4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

VectorNetCanonical 

4 2 0 2 4

X

3

2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

> Y

VectorNetCanonical 

4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

VectorNetCanonical 

4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

Additive 

4 2 0 2 4

X

3

2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

> Y

Additive 

4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

Additive 

4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

FiLM 

4 2 0 2 4

X

3

2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

> Y

FiLM 

4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

FiLM 

4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

GNN 

4 2 0 2 4

X

3

2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

> Y

GNN 

4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

GNN 

4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

Mamba 

4 2 0 2 4

X

3

2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

> Y

Mamba 

4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

Mamba 

4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

MLP 

4 2 0 2 4

X

3

2

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

> Y

MLP 

4 2 0 2 4

X

4

2

0

2

4

> Y

MLP 

Trajectory rollouts -- 999 steps, dt=0.005 31