Title: Neural Architecture Distributions: A New Paradigm for Stochastic Segmentation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.21061v1

Published Time: Tue, 23 Jun 2026 00:30:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
# NEURAL ARCHITECTURE DISTRIBUTIONS : A N EW PARADIGM FOR STOCHASTIC SEGMENTATION 

Conghui Li 1, Junhao Huang 2, Chern Hong Lim 1, Bing Xue 2, Mengjie Zhang 2

> 1

School of Information Technology, Monash University Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia 

> 2

Centre for Data Science and Artificial Intelligence, School of Engineering and Computer Science, Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, New Zealand 

Conghui.Li@monash.edu, Lim.ChernHong@monash.edu junhao.huang@vuw.ac.nz, Bing.Xue@vuw.ac.nz, mengjie.zhang@ecs.vuw.ac.nz 

# ABSTRACT 

Stochastic segmentation seeks to represent multiple plausible masks for a single image, which is essential in safety- and quality-critical applications such as medical imaging or building defect inspection. Most existing methods introduce stochasticity by injecting continuous latent variables or by iterative denoising trajectories, whose stochastic sources are difficult to search or audit directly. We propose architecture distributions as a new stochastic source for segmentation: instead of sampling a latent variable or noise, we sample a discrete architecture from a learned distribution over operator choices at multiple searchable positions in a segmentation backbone. Each sampled architecture yields one mask through the selected active path, so inference depends on the executed subnet rather than the complete candidate bank. This approach also supports architectural provenance, since each output corresponds to a specific architecture configuration. To reduce collapse toward averaged masks, we train with set-level supervision by matching a set of architecture-sampled predictions to the annotation set using an IoU-based energy-distance surrogate. We further construct the candidate bank with evolutionary search, making the support of the stochastic source optimizable before distribution learning. The proposed method achieves state-of-the-art distribution matching and hypothesis coverage on LIDC-IDRI, and remains effective on two extension tasks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to formulate stochastic segmentation as learning an architecture distribution and realizing output diversity through architecture sampling. 

Keywords stochastic segmentation · neural architecture distribution · energy distance · uncertainty estimation 

# 1 Introduction 

Semantic segmentation is a fundamental component in many safety- and quality-critical vision systems, including medical image analysis, building and infrastructure inspection, and transportation-related perception [ 1]. In these appli-cations, the target mask is often ambiguous: multiple segmentations can be plausible for the same input from different experts’ annotations due to limited image evidence, weak boundaries, or inherent subjectivity among annotators [ 2 , 3]. Therefore, beyond producing a single point estimate, it is desirable to model a conditional distribution over masks given an image, so that the model can generate multiple plausible hypotheses and support uncertainty-aware decision making. Most modern segmentation pipelines are built upon deterministic convolutional backbones and typically output one mask per input. Architectures such as U-Net and its variants have become standard due to their competitive empirical performance and efficient inference [ 4 , 5, 6 ]. However, when ambiguity exists, pixel-wise supervision with a single annotation encourages the model to predict an “average” solution, which may not correspond to any valid annotation mode. This limitation motivates stochastic segmentation, where the goal is to approximate the distribution of plausible masks rather than a single output. Our motivation is that many segmentation ambiguities are not arbitrary pixel-wise noise, but discrete structural alternatives. For example, annotators may disagree on whether a weak boundary should be included, whether a small 

> arXiv:2606.21061v1 [cs.CV] 19 Jun 2026

Neural Architecture Distributions uncertain component is connected to the main region, or how far an object should extend into low-contrast areas. Such alternatives can be viewed as different structural priors over boundary sharpness, receptive field, local smoothness, and shape connectivity. Candidate operators in an architecture bank naturally encode these biases through their kernel size, dilation, depth, residual/MBConv/ConvNeXt-style transformations, and identity paths. Sampling an architecture therefore samples an executable decision function with a particular structural bias, rather than only perturbing the feature representation of a fixed decoder. This motivates using an input-conditioned architecture distribution to represent annotator-dependent hypotheses. Existing stochastic segmentation approaches commonly introduce randomness through latent variables or iterative generative processes. A representative line of work couples a segmentation backbone with conditional latent-variable models, such as the Probabilistic U-Net [ 1], to sample diverse outputs by drawing a latent code. Other approaches model a structured distribution directly in the logit space, such as Stochastic Segmentation Networks (SSN) [ 3]. More recently, diffusion and score-based generative models have been explored for image generation and have inspired stochastic prediction mechanisms that rely on iterative denoising or numerical solvers [ 7, 2]. To increase the expressiveness of latent distributions, several works also augment variational posteriors using normalizing flows, which transform simple distributions through sequences of invertible mappings [8, 9, 10]. Despite their progress, latent-variable and diffusion-style stochastic segmentation methods have two practical drawbacks for deployment in safety-critical settings. First, improving the expressiveness of the stochastic source often increases inference cost: diffusion-type models typically require multiple sampling steps, and flow-augmented variational models add extra transformations to obtain a richer posterior [ 11 , 9]. Second, sample traceability is limited. Although the posterior, decoder, or score network is optimized, the underlying randomness is usually represented by a continuous noise/code or denoising trajectory, so individual masks are not naturally associated with a discrete, human-interpretable generation pathway. In safety-critical settings, it is often valuable to record how a specific hypothesis is produced, enabling auditing and diagnosis when predictions are used to support decisions. In this work, we propose a different perspective for dealing with stochastic segmentation: instead of injecting stochas-ticity into features or latent variables, we define the model itself as a distribution over architectures. Concretely, we insert a set of searchable positions into a backbone and define a categorical architecture distribution over candidate operators at each position. This turns the stochastic source into a discrete, searchable support: the candidate bank can be shaped by evolutionary search before the input-conditioned distribution is learned with set-level supervision. At inference time, one segmentation sample is obtained by sampling an architecture and executing its active path. This design has two advantages. First, inference is determined by the selected active path rather than by the complete stored candidate bank, because only one operator per searchable position is executed for each sample. Second, every predicted mask is associated with an explicit discrete architecture code, providing a transparent and auditable generation trace. To learn a distribution of plausible masks, we adopt set-level supervision that matches a set of predicted samples to the set of annotations, and we optimize a distributional objective based on the generalized energy distance as popularized for stochastic segmentation evaluation [ 1]. We further construct a performance-oriented candidate operator bank using an aging-evolution style search procedure [ 12 ], and train the final architecture distribution model with weight inheritance and stochastic architecture sampling. In summary, our contributions are: (1). We introduce architecture distributions as a new stochastic source for segmentation, where randomness is realized by sampling discrete architectures rather than injecting latent noise. (2). We show that the support of this stochastic source can be optimized by evolutionary construction of the candidate bank, providing a searchable alternative to fixed latent/noise sources. (3). We develop a set-level objective based on an energy-distance surrogate to prevent distribution degradation (collapse or averaging) and to better match multi-annotator labels. (4). We demonstrate that architecture sampling improves distribution matching while maintaining competitive inference time and providing architectural provenance. 

# 2 Related Work 

2.1 Stochastic Segmentation 

Stochastic segmentation aims to model multiple plausible masks for the same input, rather than a single deterministic output. This setting is common when boundaries are visually ambiguous, when multiple annotators disagree, or when the target concept is inherently subjective. Early uncertainty baselines often rely on approximate Bayesian inference like Monte-Carlo dropout or ensembles to quantify predictive uncertainty [ 13 , 14 ]; however, these approaches are not designed to match the empirical distribution induced by multi-annotator labels and may still favor an “average” solution. 2Neural Architecture Distributions 

Figure 1: Overview of Architecture Distribution Sampling framework. Given an input, we predict an input-conditioned distribution over discrete architectures, from which we sample (K) architectures. Each sampled architecture instantiates a single-path subnet to produce a set of segmentation hypotheses, which is trained via set-level supervision by matching the prediction set to the multi-annotator label set. A major line of work formulates stochastic segmentation as conditional generative modeling with latent variables. Probabilistic U-Net combines a U-Net backbone with a Conditional Variational Autoencoder (CVAE) to sample diverse segmentations conditioned on the image, and evaluates distribution matching with set-level metrics such as generalized energy distance [ 1]. PHiSeg further introduces hierarchical latent variables to capture ambiguities across multiple spatial scales, addressing the limitation that a single global latent code may be ignored or may not express localized variations [ 15 , 16 ]. Follow-up works use flow-based methods to better align the prior and posterior latent distributions, giving the latent variables richer semantic structure [17, 10, 18, 19]. Another direction represents stochasticity directly in the segmentation field or logit space. SSN models a distribution over segmentation logits with spatial correlation structure and draws samples that yield coherent masks without relying on an explicit latent-image decoder [ 3 ]. More recently, diffusion models have been explored for generating segmentation maps via iterative denoising. Many of them adapts denoising diffusion to this task and demonstrates competitive results on general benchmarks [ 7, 2, 20 ]. However, diffusion sampling typically requires many iterative steps, which can be computationally expensive at inference. 

2.2 Architecture Distributions 

Learning distributions over discrete architectural choices has been extensively studied in neural architecture search (NAS). Differentiable NAS (DARTS) [ 21 ] relaxes discrete operator selection into continuous mixtures, enabling gradient-based optimization. Stochastic NAS (SNAS) [ 22 ] models operator choices as categorical random variables and uses reparameterized sampling for end-to-end learning of an architecture distribution. Supernet-based methods (ENAS) [ 23 ] train a single over-parameterized network and evaluate many sub-networks by sampling architectures that inherit shared weights. Once-for-All (OFA) [ 24 ] extends this idea by training a single network that supports a very large family of subnetworks, enabling fast specialization by subnetwork selection. These NAS methods typically learn architecture distributions to search for a single best model under accuracy and efficiency constraints. In contrast, stochastic segmentation focuses on learning a conditional output distribution with multiple plausible masks. This motivates us using architecture sampling not only as a search tool, but as a mechanism to parameterize and sample from the model’s conditional prediction distribution. 3Neural Architecture Distributions 

# 3 Methodology 

3.1 Preliminaries 

We study stochastic segmentation where multiple segmentation masks can be valid for the same input image. Let 

x ∈ RCin ×H×W denote an input image. For each image, we observe a set of M binary annotations 

Y (x) = {y(m)}Mm=1 , y(m) ∈ { 0, 1}H×W , (1) provided by different annotators or repeated annotations. This setting corresponds to an unknown conditional distribution 

p(y | x) rather than a single deterministic target. Our goal is to learn a model that can produce multiple plausible segmentations for a given input. At inference time, the model should generate a set of K predictions (where K ≥ M ). 

ˆY(x) = {ˆy(1) , ˆy(2) , . . . , ˆy(K)} (2) such that the distribution of ˆY(x) matches the annotation distribution represented by Y(x).Unlike latent-variable approaches (CVAE or diffusion based methods) that inject random noise into the model inputs or hidden states, we represent stochasticity as a distribution over network architectures. Concretely, we define a discrete architecture variable a and a learnable, input-conditioned architecture distribution qψ (a | x). Each sample a ∼ qψ (a | x)

specifies a concrete architecture instance within a weight-inheritance network, and produces a prediction through 

ˆp(x; a) = σ(fθ (x; a)) , ˆy(x; a) = I[ˆ p(x; a) > 0.5] (3) where fθ (·; a) denotes the segmentation network instantiated by architecture a, θ are shared weights, and σ(·) is the sigmoid function. For multi-class segmentation, we replace the sigmoid head with a softmax head. Therefore, a set of predictions is obtained by sampling architectures multiple times: 

a(k) ∼ qψ (a | x), ˆy(k) = ˆ y(x; a(k)), k = 1 , . . . , K. (4) This formulation makes the model output a segmentation distribution through architecture sampling, while keeping the underlying weights inherited and the forward pass standard for each sampled architecture. 

3.2 Overall architecture 

We propose an architecture-distribution segmentation network, which we call NADS (Neural Architecture Distribution Sampling), that models ambiguity by sampling discrete architectural instances at inference time. The framework is shown in Fig. 1. Unlike CVAE- or diffusion-based stochastic segmentation, which introduces randomness through an explicit latent variable (sampling z ∼ p(z) and generating ˆy via pθ (y | x, z ) or an iterative noise-to-mask process), our method places stochasticity directly on the model structure by sampling an architecture a ∼ qψ (a | x) and producing predictions through a deterministic forward pass ˆy(x; a) = I[σ(fθ (x; a)) > 0.5] , so diversity is generated by architecture sampling rather than latent-noise injection. 

3.2.1 Architecture variable 

We define a segmentation network that contains L searchable positions, each corresponding to one SearchableBlock inserted into the backbone (e.g., several blocks in the decoder). At each position ℓ ∈ 1, . . . , L , the network provides a finite set of candidate operators, Oℓ = oℓ, 1, o ℓ, 2, . . . , o ℓ,C ℓ , where each oℓ,c is a shape-preserving mapping that takes a feature map and returns a feature map with the same tensor shape. This ensures that all operator choices are compatible with the same backbone topology. The architecture variable is a collection of discrete choices a = ( a1, a 2, . . . , a L), where each aℓ ∈ { 1, . . . , C ℓ} selects one candidate operator at position ℓ. Intuitively, sampling a instantiates a concrete architecture by specifying which candidate operator is active at each searchable position. Importantly, the global network layout remains unchanged; only the internal operator choices at these L positions vary across samples. 4Neural Architecture Distributions 

3.2.2 Architecture distribution 

We learn a conditional probability distribution over architectures qψ (a | x), parameterized by an architecture controller 

gψ that produces input-dependent logits from image features. Specifically, given an input image x, we extract a feature representation h(x) from the backbone encoder, and the controller outputs {sℓ(x)}Lℓ=1 , where sℓ(x) ∈ RCℓ controls the selection probability among Oℓ. We assume the conditional distribution factorizes across positions: 

qψ (a | x) = 

> L

Y

> ℓ=1

qψ (aℓ | x), qψ (aℓ = c | x) = softmax( sℓ(x))  

> c

(5) Here, sℓ(x) = gψ (h(x)) ℓ. This factorization avoids enumerating an exponential number of full architectures, while still representing a large space for efficient sampling and learning. Diversity arises from composing different local operator choices across positions conditioned on the input. Although factorized, the induced conditional distribution over full architectures remains expressive because the number of possible architectures is |A| = QLℓ=1 Cℓ.

3.2.3 Weight inheritance 

We denote the weight-inheritance network by fθ . Given a sampled architecture a, the network produces logits z(x; a) = 

fθ (x; a), and probabilities p(x; a) = σ(z(x; a)) . Crucially, the randomness only enters through a. Conditioned on a,the forward pass is deterministic. All architectures inherit the same parameter set θ, but activate different operator subsets (and therefore different parameter subsets) inside the shared supernetwork. 

3.2.4 Training & Inference 

At inference time, stochastic segmentations are generated by sampling architectures: 

a(k) ∼ qψ (a | x), ˆy(k) = I[σ(fθ (x; a(k))) > 0.5] , k = 1 , . . . , K. (6) The prediction set {ˆy(k)}Kk=1 approximates the model’s conditional output distribution, enabling evaluation with distributional metrics and supporting downstream uncertainty estimation. Direct optimization of discrete architectural choices is not differentiable. During training, we use a differentiable relaxation to update ψ, while still training the inherited weights θ with sampled architectures. Specifically, at each searchable position we draw a relaxed one-hot vector ˜aℓ using a straight-through Gumbel-Softmax distribution [ 25 ]with temperature τ :

˜aℓ = GumbelSoftmax( sℓ(x), τ ). (7) This relaxation enables gradient-based learning of ψ. In later stages, we progressively reduce τ to encourage sharper distributions and more discrete behavior. 

3.3 Objective function 

A key challenge in our setting is that pixel-wise supervision against a single annotation can drive the model toward an “average” mask that does not correspond to any plausible annotator output. To learn a distribution of valid masks, we employ set-level supervision: a set of sampled predictions is trained to match the set of available annotations for each image. 

3.3.1 GED surrogate loss 

For the k-th sampled architecture a(k) ∼ qψ (a | x), we denote the predicted probability map as 

p(k)(x) ≜ ˆp(x; a(k)) = σ fθ (x; a(k)). (8) We adopt sample-based energy distance with a soft-IoU ground metric. We use the soft-IoU distance 

dIoU (u, v ) ≜ 1 − ⟨u, v ⟩∥u∥1 + ∥v∥1 − ⟨ u, v ⟩ + ϵ , (9) 5Neural Architecture Distributions where u ∈ [0 , 1] H×W and v ∈ [0 , 1] H×W . Then we compute the following averages: 

¯dP Y (x) = 1

KM 

> K

X

> k=1
> M

X

> m=1

dIoU 



p(k)(x), y (m)(x)



, (10) 

¯dP P (x) = 1

K(K − 1) 

> K

X 

> k,k ′=1
> k̸=k′

dIoU 



p(k)(x), p (k′)(x)



(11) Our set-level loss is an energy-distance surrogate. Relative to the classic GED, we drop the annotation-only term ¯dY Y 

(constant w.r.t. model parameters), reweight the diversity term by β, and clip the result at zero to preserve non-negativity: 

Lset (x) = max 



0, 2 ¯dP Y (x) − β ¯dP P (x)



, (12) where β controls the strength of the diversity term among predictions. The cross term ¯dP Y encourages sampled predictions to be close to the annotation set, while the negative self term −β ¯dP P discourages mode collapse by penalizing overly similar predictions. 

3.3.2 Full objective 

In addition, we add an auxiliary stabilizer acting on the mean prediction and the mean annotation to ease early optimization. Let z(k)(x) = fθ (x; a(k)) denote the logit map produced by the k-th sampled architecture. 

¯z(x) = 1

K

> K

X

> k=1

z(k)(x), ¯y(x) = 1

M

> M

X

> m=1

y(m)(x). (13) We define Laux (x) as a standard BCE–Dice loss applied to ¯z(x) and ¯y(x). This term is intended only as a stabilizer: with Lset kept as the dominant objective through a small λaux , it does not drive the model toward a single averaged mask. Finally, we regularize the architecture distribution using negative entropy to avoid premature collapse: 

R(qψ ) = − ExLX

> ℓ=1

H(qψ (aℓ | x)) = ExLX

> ℓ=1
> Cℓ

X

> c=1

qψ (aℓ = c | x) log  qψ (aℓ = c | x) + ε. (14) where qψ (aℓ | x) is the input-conditioned categorical distribution at position ℓ. The full training objective over a batch with weights λaux and λarch is 

L = Ex

h

Lset (x) + λaux Laux (x)

i

+ λarch R(qψ ) (15) 

3.4 Variable architecture search 

In our framework, stochasticity comes from sampling among discrete candidate blocks at each searchable position. We construct a position-specific candidate bank using an efficient evolutionary procedure, and then learn the architecture distribution over the retained candidates. 

3.4.1 Search space 

We define L searchable positions in the baseline network. At each position ℓ, a candidate block is specified by a compact genotype that encodes the internal micro-architecture of a shape-preserving module. All candidates are constrained to satisfy oℓ,c : RC×H×W → RC×H×W , so they can be swapped without changing tensor shapes or the global backbone topology. 

3.4.2 Aging evolution 

We construct the candidate operator bank for each searchable position using aging evolution. Specifically, we maintain a fixed-size population of candidate genotypes. At each iteration, we randomly sample a small subset of the population, 6Neural Architecture Distributions 

Figure 2: Qualitative results on LIDC images with our method. (a)-(d) denote as ground truth label from four different experts. (e) represent the variance of 16 predictions. (f)-(i) represent the 4 of 16 prediction from proposed method. select the best-performing individual as the parent, generate a child by applying a random mutation, and evaluate the child under a fixed, budgeted training protocol using the same stochastic-segmentation objective. The child is inserted into the population and the oldest individual is removed to preserve constant population size, which encourages exploration and reduces premature convergence. After the search, we retain the top-N candidates at each position to form the final candidate bank, and learn the architecture distribution over this bank during end-to-end training. 

3.4.3 Fitness evaluation 

We lock the supernet to the genotype, which restricts the candidate operator set at each position, and estimate HM-IoU/GED using a small number of stochastic forward passes by sampling architectures from the induced distribution. We combine them into a scalar objective 

fit( g) = (1 − HM -IoU) + λged GED + λcost Cost( g), (16) where Cost (g) is a complexity proxy accumulated from the selected genes. Including this proxy biases the search toward lower-cost candidate structures, reducing the computational cost of each sampled active path at inference. 

# 4 Experiment 

4.1 Main Experiments 

We design three different experiments to validate our method from complementary perspectives: the main experiment, stochastic segmentation on LIDC-IDRI with multi-annotator supervision, where modeling a conditional output distri-bution is essential; multi-class deterministic segmentation on Cityscapes, to verify that our architecture-distribution training does not sacrifice standard semantic segmentation accuracy [ 26 ]; and single-class curvilinear deterministic segmentation on Crack500, to test robustness on thin-structure targets with severe class imbalance [ 27 ]. Unless otherwise stated, we follow the dataset protocols from [ 8] and [ 28 ] for fair comparison. For deterministic datasets, the architecture distribution is not used for distribution matching. Instead, the controller is trained to minimize the expected standard segmentation loss, and typically converges to a near-deterministic policy. At inference, we use Maximum a Posteriori (MAP) inference for efficient prediction. In addition, when only a single annotation is available per image (M = 1 ), distribution matching at the set level is not identifiable. Therefore, we train using the standard Dice loss. 

4.1.1 Evaluation metrics. 

For LIDC, we evaluate distribution matching using GED and HM-IoU, both computed between a set of K predicted samples and the annotation set. We report GED K and HM-IoU K under multiple K values to reflect the quality of the learned conditional distribution as the number of samples increases. For Cityscapes and Crack500, we report standard single-output segmentation metrics: IoU on Cityscapes, and Precision, Recall, and F1-score on Crack500. 

4.1.2 Stochastic Segmentation 

Table 1 reports the quantitative results on LIDC, with methods listed in chronological order; all baseline values are taken from [ 8 ]. Our approach achieves the best results on both distribution-matching and coverage-oriented metrics: it obtains the lowest GED under every sampling budget and the highest HM-IoU among all compared methods. 7Neural Architecture Distributions Table 1: Quantitative results on LIDC-IDRI, with methods listed in chronological order. All baseline results are taken from [ 8]. Our results are over 3 seeds. Note that lower values of GED indicate better performance, while higher values of HM-IoU are preferred. 

Method GED 16 GED 32 GED 50 GED 100 HM-IoU 16 HM-IoU 32 

Prob. Unet [1] 0.310 ±0.01 0.303 ±0.01 – 0.252 ±0.004 0.552 ±0.00 0.548 ±0.00 

HProb. Unet [16] 0.270 ±0.01 – – – 0.530 ±0.01 –PhiSeg [15] 0.262 ±0.00 0.247 ±0.00 – 0.224 ±0.004 0.586 ±0.00 0.595 ±0.00 

SSN [3] 0.259 ±0.00 0.243 ±0.01 – 0.225 ±0.002 0.558 ±0.00 0.555 ±0.01 

cFlow [17] – 0.225 ±0.01 – – – 0.584 ±0.00 

CAR [29] – – – 0.228 ±0.009 – –JProb. Unet [30] – 0.206 ±0.01 – – – 0.647 ±0.01 

PixelSeg [31] 0.243 ±0.01 – – – 0.614 ±0.01 –MoSE [32] 0.218 ±0.03 0.195 ±0.002 0.195 ±0.002 0.189 ±0.002 0.624 ±0.004 –AB [33] 0.213 ±0.01 0.196 ±0.02 0.193 ±0.002 – 0.614 ±0.01 0.619 ±0.001 

CIMD [7] 0.234 ±0.005 0.218 ±0.005 0.210 ±0.005 – 0.587 ±0.01 0.592 ±0.002 

CCDM [2] 0.212 ±0.002 0.194 ±0.001 0.187 ±0.002 0.183 ±0.002 0.623 ±0.002 0.631 ±0.002 

GMM_NF [8] 0.196 ±0.001 0.189 ±0.001 0.185 ±0.002 0.184 ±0.000 0.641 ±0.002 0.644 ±0.001 

Ours 0.172 ±0.001 0.169 ±0.001 0.165 ±0.003 0.164 ±0.003 0.658 ±0.001 0.671 ±0.002 

Specifically, our method attains HM-IoU 16 = 0 .658 and HM-IoU 32 = 0 .671 , exceeding the best previously reported baseline on each metric (HM-IoU 16 = 0 .641 by GMM_NF and HM-IoU 32 = 0 .647 by JProb. U-Net) by +1 .7 and 

+2 .4 points, respectively. The improvement in GED is more pronounced: our method reduces GED from the strongest baseline values of 0.196, 0.189, 0.185, and 0.183 to 0.172, 0.169, 0.165, and 0.164 for K = {16 , 32 , 50 , 100 }. Since GED penalizes both missing annotation modes and generating samples that are far from the annotator set, these gains suggest that architecture sampling does not merely increase diversity; it produces diverse hypotheses that remain well aligned with the empirical multi-rater distribution. Qualitative examples are shown in Fig. 2. Our sampled predictions (f–i) produce multiple plausible masks that vary in size and shape in a way that mirrors these annotator differences, rather than collapsing to a single averaged contour. Table 2: Quantitative results on Cityscapes. All baseline results are from [ 8]. “Param” is the model parameter count in millions; for our method it is the activated MAP subnet, while the full supernet stores 387M. 

Method Backbone Param IoU 

DeepLabv3 [34] ResNet50 39M 58.6 DeepLabv3 [34] ResNet101 58M 59.2 UPerNet [35] ResNet101 83M 60.7 HRNet [36] w48v2 70M 63.3 UPerNet [37] Swin-Tiny 58M 65.5 CCDM [2] - 30M 60.3 CCDM [2] Dino ViT-S 50M 65.8 Prob. Unet [1] - 33M 63.2 GMM_NF [8] - 38M 73.0 Ours - 26M 74.2 

Table 3: Quantitative results on Crack500. All baseline results are from [ 28 ]. The proposed method obtains the highest precision and F1-score. 

Method Precision Recall F1 

UNet [4] 62.22 68.85 61.83 VGG-UNet [38] 58.18 60.26 51.79 TopoNet [39] 66.81 62.68 60.06 DRU [40] 61.94 71.43 62.82 Crackformer [41] 69.13 66.24 64.75 JTFN [42] 68.81 69.06 65.76 JTFN + CIRL [28] 70.32 69.93 67.62 Prob. Unet [1] 56.80 69.39 60.80 Ours 71.02 70.53 70.97 4.1.3 Multi-Class Deterministic Segmentation 

Table 2 summarizes results on Cityscapes. All baseline numbers are from [ 8]. Although our method is primarily motivated by stochastic segmentation, it also generalizes to deterministic multi-class settings and yields competitive semantic segmentation performance. The model reaches 74.2 IoU, outperforming the strongest baseline in the table while maintaining the same evaluation protocol. For the deterministic task we use MAP inference, and the activated subnet 8Neural Architecture Distributions 

Figure 3: Qualitative result from Cityscapes. Following the setting of [ 8 ], all baselines are trained and tested by 256 × 512 resolution. 

Figure 4: Qualitative result from Crack500. Following the setting of [ 28 ], all baselines are trained and tested by 256 × 256 resolution. contains 26M parameters. In Fig. 3, the predictions exhibit cleaner region consistency and sharper object–background boundaries than the compared outputs. 

4.1.4 Single-Class Curvilinear Deterministic Segmentation 

Table 3 reports results on Crack500, where the goal is to segment thin crack structures. Baseline results are taken from [ 28 ]. Our method achieves 71.02 Precision, 70.53 Recall, and 70.97 F1, outperforming prior approaches including CrackFormer [ 41 ] and JTFN+CIRL [ 28 ]. These results indicate that the proposed architecture-distribution framework is not restricted to ambiguous segmentation; it also transfers to highly imbalanced curvilinear segmentation and yields competitive deterministic accuracy. 

4.2 Inference Efficiency 

We compare inference efficiency with representative stochastic segmentation baselines: Prob. U-Net [ 1], PHiSeg [ 15 ], cFlow [ 17 ], GMM_NF [ 8], and CCDM [ 2 ]. Table 4 reports the active parameter count, the asymptotic sampling complexity when image features are reusable, and the measured feature-cached inference time for generating K ∈{1, 16 , 32 } segmentation hypotheses from a single input. The cost can be decomposed into a deterministic image-feature term E and a sample-specific stochastic term. For a fixed input, many stochastic segmentation models can cache the encoder features across multiple hypotheses, so increasing 

K mainly repeats the latent head, decoder, flow, or denoising component rather than the full backbone. The inference times in Table 4 follow this feature-cached protocol to reflect the standard multi-sample deployment setting. Under the reusable-feature view, Prob. U-Net draws one latent code per sample and repeats a low-cost stochastic head, giving 

O(E + KH ); PHiSeg repeats its hierarchical stochastic decoder, giving O(E + KD ). Flow-augmented methods (cFlow and GMM_NF) additionally apply invertible transformations for each sample, resulting in O(E + KL flow ), while diffusion-based sampling (CCDM) generates each output through an iterative denoising chain, yielding O(E + KT ).Our method follows the same reusable-feature principle, but the repeated component is an architecture-dependent active path rather than only a final prediction layer. In a cached implementation, the encoder/controller features are computed once, architectures are sampled from qψ (a | x), and each hypothesis executes only its selected path. We denote this per-sample active-path cost by Da, which gives O(E + KD a). The activated subnet contains 26M parameters on average, while the full supernet contains 387M parameters. Thus, although the model stores a larger candidate bank and incurs additional offline search and training cost, deployment cost is determined by the sampled active path rather 9Neural Architecture Distributions Table 4: Model complexity and inference efficiency. Active Params reports the parameters executed by one sampled forward path (averaged over sampled subnets for Ours). Inference time is measured under a feature-cached protocol for generating K samples from one input at fixed resolution on the same hardware, where deterministic image features are computed once and reused when applicable. Each setting is repeated 10 times and reported as mean and standard deviation.                                                 

> Method Active Params Sampling Complexity Inference Time K=1 Inference Time K=16 Inference Time K=32
> Prob. U-Net [1] 33M O(E+KH )34.58 ±0.07 98.4 ±0.6166.3 ±0.9
> PHiSeg [15] 41M O(E+KD )42.10 ±0.08 104.7 ±0.8172.5 ±1.1
> cFlow [17] 34M O(E+KL flow )139.84 ±0.11 635.2 ±1.81163.7 ±2.6
> GMM_NF [8] 38M O(E+KL flow )213.02 ±0.14 1026.4 ±2.41893.8 ±3.5
> CCDM [2] 30M O(E+KT )1322.64 ±5.83 19480.6 ±9.738110.2 ±17 .5
> Ours 26M(AVG) O(E+KD a)28.6 ±4.294.8 ±9.5171.9 ±18 .7

Table 5: Disentangling the stochastic objective and sampling mechanism on LIDC with K = 16 .

# Variant HM-IoU GED Best-candidate Dice 

# NADS + GED 0.658 0.172 0.831 NADS + best-candidate Dice 0.612 0.327 0.833 

# NADS + Hungarian IoU 0.641 0.284 0.819 16-network ensemble 0.623 0.276 0.817 Fixed architecture + GED 0.536 0.981 0.762 than by the complete bank. The K = 1 inference time is reduced by the complexity-aware evolutionary objective, which favors lower-cost candidate structures. For larger K, the inference time remains comparable to CVAE-style baselines while preserving the accuracy and architectural-provenance benefits of architecture sampling. Because different sampled operators instantiate slightly different paths, per-sample inference time varies, which explains the larger standard deviation reported for our method. 

4.3 Ablation Studies 

We conduct ablation studies to clarify why both architecture sampling and set-level supervision are necessary for architecture-distribution stochastic segmentation. Unless otherwise stated, ablations are evaluated on LIDC using sampled prediction sets and report HM-IoU, GED, and complementary coverage-oriented metrics. 

4.3.1 Architecture sampler and set-level objective 

We first disentangle the contribution of the architecture sampler from the choice of stochastic objective. Table 5 compares NADS trained with the GED surrogate against alternative set losses and sampling mechanisms at K = 16 .Replacing GED with best-candidate Dice slightly improves its own metric, but substantially degrades HM-IoU and GED, suggesting that best-of-K supervision rewards whether one sample matches an annotation while leaving many sampled architectures weakly constrained. Hungarian matching is stronger, but still below GED because only the matched prediction–annotation pairs receive direct supervision. Conversely, fixed architecture + GED performs poorly, showing that the set-level loss alone cannot create a useful stochastic distribution without a sampling mechanism. A 16-network ensemble is competitive with simple alternatives, but remains below NADS+GED, indicating that weight-shared, input-conditioned architecture sampling is more effective than training independent networks for this setting. 

4.3.2 Standard losses for stochasticity 

We next replace our set-level GED surrogate with conventional pixel-wise segmentation losses (BCE, Dice), while following a common practice for multi-annotated data: at each iteration we randomly select one mask from the annotation set as the target. We observe a consistent failure mode: the model tends to lose stochasticity and the learned architecture distribution collapses to a near-deterministic configuration, which means one operator dominates selection at many searchable positions. As shown in Table 6, this leads to degraded distributional metrics (HM-IoU 16 = 0 .49 ,10 Neural Architecture Distributions Table 6: Ablations on LIDC ( K=16 , 32 ). Standard single-label losses and evolution-only selection both cause the architecture distribution to collapse toward a near-deterministic network, leading to poor distributional metrics. 

Variant K=16 K=32 

HM-IoU GED HM-IoU GED 

Dice 0.492 0.895 0.496 0.882 BCE 0.437 0.854 0.448 0.849 Evolution selection 0.572 1.000 0.573 0.998 Ours 0.658 0.172 0.671 0.169 GED 16 = 0 .89 ). This behavior is expected because single-label supervision optimizes a point-estimation objective and provides no explicit incentive to match the multi-modal annotation set or to maintain sample diversity. 

4.3.3 Evolutionary optimization of selection logits 

We also test learning the architecture-selection distribution without gradients: instead of training the controller ψ by backpropagation, we treat the per-position selection logits as an evolvable genotype and update them with an aging evolutionary strategy based on validation fitness. This approach is highly unstable and rapidly collapses to near-deterministic selections, yielding poor distributional performance (Table 6). We attribute the failure to an optimization mismatch: the fitness is noisy from stochastic sampling and non-stationary due to evolving shared weights θ, so black-box evolution over-exploits early winners and saturates the selection logits, failing to maintain a non-degenerate multi-modal distribution. These results motivate our gradient-based learning of the controller ψ jointly with θ.

# 5 Conclusion 

In this work, we introduced architecture distributions as a new stochastic source for segmentation, where diversity is generated by sampling a discrete architecture a ∼ qψ (a | x) and producing each hypothesis through its active path. Unlike latent-code or denoising-noise sources, the support of this stochastic source is a discrete architecture space that can be shaped by evolutionary search before distribution learning, providing a way to better align sampled hypotheses with the empirical annotation distribution while retaining architectural provenance for auditing. We trained the distribution with set-level supervision to avoid averaging collapse and to better match the multi-annotator label set. Empirically, on LIDC-IDRI our model achieves the best performance among compared methods in both distribution matching (GED 16 =0.172) and hypothesis coverage (HM-IoU 16 =0.658). The main limitations are the additional search/training cost required by the candidate bank and the finite support of the architecture space, |A| =

QLℓ=1 Cℓ. These costs are incurred before deployment, while inference executes only sampled active paths and remains comparable to representative stochastic segmentation baselines. Future work can further explore how to optimize the architecture-distribution support, including search objectives that more directly target distribution matching and calibrated uncertainty. 11 Neural Architecture Distributions 

# Supplementary Material A Implementation detail 

A.1 Network Architecture 

We insert shape-preserving SearchableBlocks into the decoder feature stream. Concretely, after each decoder up-sampling stage, we place nsearch searchable blocks, resulting in L = 4 × nsearch searchable positions in total. Each SearchableBlock keeps the input/output tensor shape identical ( RC×H×W → RC×H×W ), so it can be dropped into the decoder without changing skip connections or resolution transitions. Each searchable position ℓ maintains a finite candidate set Oℓ = {oℓ, 1, . . . , o ℓ,C ℓ }. Candidates are compiled from a compact genotype describing micro-architecture choices, including block family (residual/MBConv/ConvNeXt/identity), kernel size, dilation, expansion ratio, number of layers, optional SE, activation, DropPath, and LayerScale. Unless stated otherwise, we use the same default pool size across positions, and later keep a smaller Top-N subset after evolution. 

A.2 Supernet warmup 

Warmup is used to obtain reliable inherited weights for the large operator bank before evolutionary selection and learning the architecture distribution. Practically, warmup trains only the shared operator weights while disabling any learning of architecture parameters: we freeze all architecture-related parameters and optimize only the supernet weights with AdamW. At each iteration, we create a set of Ktrain predictions for the same mini-batch by repeating: 1. uniformly sample one operator at every searchable position; 2. execute a single-path forward pass through the instantiated subnetwork. This produces Ktrain hypotheses {ˆy(k)}Ktrain  

> k=1

stacked as (B, K train , 1, H, W ), which are optimized with the same set-level stochastic segmentation loss used later in training. Uniform per-position sampling during warmup ensures that all candidates receive gradient updates sufficiently, so the bank becomes broadly functional rather than overfitting to a small subset of operators. After warmup, we unfreeze architecture parameters and proceed to evolutionary candidate selection and end-to-end training with the reduced Top-N banks. 

A.3 Evolutionary Algorithm 

The evolutionary procedure is used to construct a performance-oriented, position-specific candidate bank for each searchable position. Concretely, we start from a warm-started supernet (Phase 1), run aging evolution on a held-out search-validation split, and finally keep Top-N candidates per position to form the bank used in end-to-end training (Phase 3). The detailed procedure is given in Algorithm 1. 

A.3.1 Search space 

We define L searchable positions in the decoder. At each position ℓ, a candidate operator is a shape-preserving module (RC×H×W → RC×H×W ), so it can be swapped without changing the global U-Net topology. Each operator is specified by a compact genotype 

g = ( block_type , k, d, e, n, r, act , p dp , γ ls ), (17) where block_type ∈ { resconv, mbconv, convnext, identity }, k ∈ { 3, 5, 7} is kernel size, d ∈ { 1, 2} is dilation, 

e ∈ { 2, 3, 4, 6} is expansion ratio, n ∈ { 1, 2, 3} is the number of internal layers (with constraints for some block types), r ∈ { 0, 0.125 , 0.25 } is SE ratio, act ∈ { relu, silu, gelu } is activation, pdp is DropPath rate, and γls is LayerScale initialization. The full architecture is represented as a length-L index vector a = [ a1, . . . , a L], where aℓ selects one candidate from the local pool at position ℓ.

A.3.2 Initialization 

Before evolution, we build an initial pool of C candidate genotypes per position by random sampling with a fixed RNG seed, while enforcing uniqueness via a hash key of the genotype fields. In our experiments, we set C = 10 candidates per position. This pool is created once at warmup time and then re-used during evolution and final training. 12 Neural Architecture Distributions 

Algorithm 1 Aging evolution 

Require: Warm-started supernet fθ with per-position pools {O ℓ}Lℓ=1 ; search-validation loader Dsv ; hyper-parameters 

(P, S, T, p mut , K eval , B eval , t ft , η ft , K ft , λ ged , λ cost , N, E ).

Ensure: Top-N banks {B ℓ}Lℓ=1 . 

> 1:

Initialize population P ← ∅ , history H ← ∅ . 

> 2:

for i = 1 to P do  

> 3:

Sample a random genotype index vector a(i) (biased against identity).  

> 4:

Evaluate fit( a(i)) on Dsv with the budgeted protocol.  

> 5:

Insert a(i) into P and H. 

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

for t = 1 to T do  

> 8:

Sample a subset S ⊂ P with |S| = S. 

> 9:

Parent ap ← arg min a∈S fit( a). 

> 10:

Child ac ← Mutate( ap, p mut ) (change 1–3 positions).  

> 11:

Evaluate fit( ac) on Dsv (lock genotype; optional local fine-tune; metric evaluation; cost proxy).  

> 12:

Insert ac into P and H. 

> 13:

if |P| > P then  

> 14:

Remove the oldest individual from P (aging)  

> 15:

end if  

> 16:

end for  

> 17:

Select elites E ← the best E individuals from H by fitness.  

> 18:

for ℓ = 1 to L do  

> 19:

Rank candidate indices at position ℓ by mean fitness within E. 

> 20:

Set Bℓ ← Top-N candidates (with deterministic fill if needed).  

> 21:

end for  

> 22:

return {B ℓ}Lℓ=1 .

A.3.3 Aging evolution 

We use regularized aging evolution with a fixed population size. At each cycle, we sample a small subset tournament, select the best individual as parent, mutate it to produce a child, evaluate the child with a budgeted protocol, then insert the child into the population and remove the oldest individual to keep population size constant. This aging mechanism encourages exploration and reduces premature convergence. Given a parent index vector a, we mutate it with rate pmut by randomly changing 1 to 3 positions; for each chosen position, the current index is replaced with another valid index from that position’s pool excluding the current one. This mutation has low computational cost and keeps the global topology unchanged. 

A.3.4 Fitness evaluation 

To evaluate an individual a, we lock the supernet to the genotype specified by a, instantiate the corresponding single-path subnet, and compute its HM-IoU, GED, and complexity-aware fitness on the search-validation loader under a fixed evaluation budget: for each input, we sample architectures from the induced distribution over the restricted candidate sets and execute a single-path forward pass to obtain a prediction set. We generate Keval sampled predictions per input to interface with the same set-based evaluation code, and we limit evaluation to at most Beval images to control cost. Furthermore, we perform a short local fine-tune on the search-validation stream to improve genotype distinguishability. We fine-tune only the shared weights for tft steps with the locked genotype, then restore the original shared weights from a snapshot to avoid contaminating the supernet. Architecture parameters remain frozen throughout fine-tuning. During this local fine-tune, we keep the genotype locked in the same way and sample architectures as above, while updating only the shared weights. We combine distributional metrics with a complexity proxy: 

fit( a) = (1 − HM -IoU) + λged GED + λcost Cost( a), (18) where Cost( a) accumulates per-position genotype complexity scores: 

Cost( a) = 

> L

X

> ℓ=1

cost( gℓ,a ℓ ), cost( g) ∝ (k2) ( C2) max( n, 1) · η(g), (19) 13 Neural Architecture Distributions and η(g) applies small multiplicative factors for MBConv/ConvNeXt expansion, dilation, and SE usage . Lower fitness is better. 

A.3.5 Top-N extraction. 

After evolution, we take the best E elites from the entire history ranked by fitness. For each position, we compute the mean fitness of each candidate index among elites, rank candidates by this mean, and keep the Top-N genotypes. If fewer than N unique indices appear among elites at a position, we fill the bank with unused pool candidates and with additional randomly sampled non-identity genotypes. The resulting Top-N per-position banks are then used to instantiate the final training model. 

A.4 Parameter Settings 

This section summarizes the default hyper-parameters used in our experiments, following the released implementation. 

A.4.1 Dataset setting LIDC-IDRI is a thoracic CT dataset for lung cancer screening/diagnosis, where lesions are annotated by multiple radiologists, making it suitable for studying annotation ambiguity. We partition the dataset into three disjoint subsets: train for supernet warmup and final training, search-val used only for evolutionary fitness evaluation and training-time monitoring, and test sealed until the final report. Concretely, we set search_val_split=0.10 and test_split=0.20, and only apply paired geometric augmentation on the training subset (random flips and 90 ◦ rotations). 

Crack500 is a pixel-wise pavement crack segmentation dataset. Following the standard protocol, the dataset is provided as 500 high-resolution images and further processed into 3,368 cropped samples of size 360 × 640 . We use the official split with 1,897 training images, 347 validation images, and 1,124 testing images. During training, we apply horizontal flipping, random cropping, and random rotations of 90 ◦/180 ◦/270 ◦; additionally, all training samples are cropped to 256 × 256 for optimization and all methods are trained/tested at 256 × 256 resolution. 

Cityscapes provides fine-grained pixel annotations for urban driving scenes with 19 semantic classes, serving as a representative multi-class deterministic segmentation benchmark. We use the official split containing 2,975 training images and 500 validation images at native resolution 512 × 1024 . Following the referenced setting, we use a resized resolution of 256 × 512 for both training and evaluation. 

A.4.2 Phase 1: Warmup 

We warm up the shared supernet weights using SPOS-style single-path uniform sampling: at each step, each searchable position randomly selects one operator, and we aggregate K such stochastic forward passes to form a prediction set for set-level supervision. During warmup, architecture parameters ψ are frozen and only inherited weights θ are updated with AdamW. We use warmup_steps=500, warmup_K=4, and warmup_lr= 2 × 10 −4.

A.4.3 Phase 2: Aging Evolution 

Unless otherwise stated, we use a pool size per position of C = 10 with a retained bank size per position of N = 5 ;a population size of P = 40 , tournament size of S = 10 , T = 120 cycles, and mutation probability pmut = 0 .30 ; an elite keep of E = 30 for Top-N extraction; evaluation settings of Keval = 16 forward passes per input and Beval = 120 

images; local fine-tuning for tft = 30 steps with learning rate 5 × 10 −5 and Kft = 4 passes per step; and fitness weights 

λged = 1 .0 and λcost = 0 .02 .

A.4.4 Phase 3: Training 

We train the final NADS model for epochs=200 with batch_size=8 and num_workers=4. We use two AdamW optimizers: one for inherited weights θ (lr_theta= 1 × 10 −4, weight_decay= 1 × 10 −4) and one for architecture parameters ψ

(lr_psi= 3 × 10 −4, weight_decay=0). We freeze ψ for the first warmup_epochs= 0.1 × epochs and then jointly optimize 

(θ, ψ ). For the training objective, we use a diversity weight β = 1 .0 in Lset , a small auxiliary-loss weight λaux = 0 .1,and an architecture-regularizer weight λarch = 0 .01 that is annealed toward 0 together with the temperature τ .We employ a straight-through Gumbel-Softmax relaxation with temperature τ during training and progressively anneal it to encourage more discrete behavior. Concretely, ψ is frozen for the first 0.1E epochs (with E the total number of 14 Neural Architecture Distributions 

Figure 5: Per-position operator selection probabilities for a random input. Table 7: Training time per epoch for representative stochastic segmentation baselines and the proposed method. NADS requires the largest training time because it optimizes a full supernet with a large candidate operator bank. 

Method Time/epoch (min:sec) 

Prob. U-Net [1] 2:28 PHiSeg [15] 3:13 GMM_NF [8] 5:52 CCDM [2] 2:35 Ours 9:42 epochs), after which τ is linearly annealed from 5.0 to 0.5:

τ (e) = 



5.0, e < 0.1E, 

max 



0.5, 5.0 − 4.5 e − 0.1E

0.9E



, e ≥ 0.1E, 

where e is the current epoch. The entropy regularizer coefficient and the uniform-mix probability are also decayed over training. For stochastic prediction, we sample K_pred=16 architectures per input (threshold at 0.5, consistent with Eq. (6)) and evaluate with tau_eval=0.7; we cap GED/HM-IoU evaluation to max_images_for_ged=200 images when monitoring. 

# B Visualization of operator probabilities 

To verify that the learned architecture controller produces a non-degenerate input-conditioned distribution rather than collapsing to a single deterministic path, we visualize the operator selection probabilities at every searchable position for a randomly sampled input in Fig. 5. The heatmap indicates that different positions exhibit different preferences over operators, suggesting depth- and stage-dependent operator roles. No single operator dominates all positions, which supports the use of conditional computation and stochastic sampling at inference. This qualitative evidence complements the quantitative gains: the controller learns a structured, position-aware mixture over candidate operators, enabling diverse hypotheses while still executing only one sampled path per forward pass. 

# C Training time 

Justification. Table 7 compares the training time of NADS with representative stochastic segmentation baselines. NADS has higher training cost because it optimizes a supernet containing a large candidate operator bank. Although 15 Neural Architecture Distributions Table 8: Ablation on the number of searchable positions and the retained candidate bank size (Top-N per position). #Positions Top-3 Top-5 Top-10 

HM-IoU GED HM-IoU GED HM-IoU GED 4 0.606 0.261 0.613 0.241 0.608 0.245 8 0.609 0.241 0.617 0.237 0.600 0.264 12 0.611 0.241 0.622 0.231 0.608 0.255 Table 9: Reference numbers for ablating the Gumbel-Softmax temperature τ and annealing strategy under straight-through sampling. We report the average gate entropy H across all searchable positions. H0.1T and HT denote the average gate entropy measured at 10% and 100% of training, respectively. Setting τ schedule H0.1T HT HM-IoU GED Fixed high τ τ = 5 .0 1.46 1.38 0.615 0.242 Fixed low τ τ = 0 .5 0.62 0.25 0.607 0.252 Piecewise anneal 5.0 → 0.5 1.44 0.53 0.630 0.233 

inference executes only a single sampled path, training must repeatedly sample architectures and update the inherited weights of many candidate operators so that the search space is sufficiently trained for reliable selection and distribution learning. Consequently, each epoch takes longer (9m42s) than the compared stochastic segmentation baselines. This additional cost is incurred during offline training, while deployment benefits from the resulting distributional accuracy and calibrated predictive diversity. 

# D Capability evaluation 

We ablate the number of searchable positions ( L) and the per-position retained operator budget (Top-N ) to understand the capacity–performance trade-off under small epoch at Table 8. In this experiment, we applied 100 epochs per setting. Each setting are trained and evaluated 3 times to take average. As shown in Table 8, increasing L from 4 to 12 generally improves both accuracy and distributional fidelity under a moderate K (with Top-5, HM-IoU increases from 0.613 to 0.622, while GED decreases from 0.241 to 0.231), indicating that more positions provide additional stage-wise flexibility for input-conditioned operator selection and better alignment with multi-annotation uncertainty. In contrast, using an overly large retained set (Top-10) can be suboptimal, likely because low-ranked operators add optimization noise and weaken the quality of the learned operator distribution, leading to degraded HM-IoU/GED in some settings. The method also remains effective under small capacity. With L=4 and Top-3 per position, corresponding to 12 available operator choices in total, the model achieves HM-IoU 0.606 and GED 0.261. This suggests that a large operator pool is not required for competitive distributional quality. The observation is consistent with the intuition that, when the retained per-position budget N is at least the number of dominant annotation modes, the model can allocate enough distinct operators to cover the major modes; we treat this as an empirical observation rather than a guarantee. Overall, L=12 with Top-5 yields the best trade-off among the evaluated configurations and is used as the default configuration. 

# E Temperature τ evaluation 

Our architecture controller parameterizes an input-conditioned categorical distribution qψ (a | x) = QLℓ=1 qψ (aℓ | x)

over discrete operator choices, from which we sample architectures to generate K hypotheses at inference time. Since directly optimizing discrete architectural choices is non-differentiable, during training we adopt the straight-through Gumbel-Softmax relaxation with temperature τ (Eq. (7) in main paper) to obtain a relaxed one-hot vector ˜aℓ. As stated in our method, we progressively reduce τ in later stages to encourage sharper distributions and more discrete behavior, better matching the discrete sampling used at inference. We compare three strategies during training: Fixed-High temperature, Fixed-Low temperature, and Annealed tempera-ture (start high and progressively decrease to a low value). We report distributional quality metrics together with an optimization diagnostic, the average architecture entropy H(qψ (aℓ | x)) . All experiments are trained for 100 epochs. 16 Neural Architecture Distributions All results are summarized in Table 9. Fixed-High keeps the relaxation overly soft, so the controller learns under a “mixture-like” proxy while inference relies on discrete architecture sampling. This train–test mismatch typically hurts both segmentation quality and set-level matching. Fixed-Low makes the relaxation near-discrete from the beginning; the straight-through estimator becomes high-variance and the controller tends to prematurely concentrate on a few operators, leading to reduced entropy, even with the negative-entropy regularizer R(qψ ). In contrast, the annealed schedule provides a stable exploration–exploitation trade-off: early training benefits from smoother gradients and exploration (higher entropy), while later training becomes more discrete to align with inference-time sampling, yielding the best distributional metrics. 

# References 

[1] Simon A. A. Kohl, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Clemens Meyer, Jeffrey De Fauw, Joseph R. Ledsam, Klaus H. Maier-Hein, S. M. Ali Eslami, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, and Olaf Ronneberger. A probabilistic u-net for segmentation of ambiguous images. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS’18, page 6965–6975, Montréal, Canada, 2018. Curran Associates Inc. [2] Lukas Zbinden, Lars Doorenbos, Theodoros Pissas, Adrian Thomas Huber, Raphael Sznitman, and Pablo Márquez-Neila. Stochastic segmentation with conditional categorical diffusion models. In 2023 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 1119–1129, 2023. [3] Miguel Monteiro, Loïc Le Folgoc, Daniel Coelho de Castro, Nick Pawlowski, Bernardo Marques, Konstantinos Kamnitsas, Mark van der Wilk, and Ben Glocker. Stochastic segmentation networks: modelling spatially correlated aleatoric uncertainty. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. [4] Olaf Ronneberger, Philipp Fischer, and Thomas Brox. U-net: Convolutional networks for biomedical image segmentation. In Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention–MICCAI 2015: 18th international conference, Munich, Germany, October 5-9, 2015, proceedings, part III 18 , pages 234–241. Springer, 2015. [5] Zongwei Zhou, Md Mahfuzur Rahman Siddiquee, Nima Tajbakhsh, and Jianming Liang. Unet++: A nested u-net architecture for medical image segmentation. In Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis and Multimodal Learning for Clinical Decision Support , pages 3–11, Cham, 2018. Springer International Publishing. [6] Hu Cao, Yueyue Wang, Joy Chen, Dongsheng Jiang, Xiaopeng Zhang, Qi Tian, and Manning Wang. Swin-unet: Unet-like pure transformer for medical image segmentation. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision Workshops(ECCVW) , 2022. [7] Aimon Rahman, Jeya Maria Jose Valanarasu, Ilker Hacihaliloglu, and Vishal M. Patel. Ambiguous medical image segmentation using diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 11536–11546, June 2023. [8] Conghui Li, Chern Hong Lim, and Xin Wang. GMM-based VAE model with normalising flow for effective stochastic segmentation. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [9] George Papamakarios, Eric Nalisnick, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, Shakir Mohamed, and Balaji Lakshminarayanan. Normalizing flows for probabilistic modeling and inference. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 22(1), January 2021. [10] M. M. Amaan Valiuddin, Christiaan G. A. Viviers, Ruud J. G. van Sloun, Peter H. N. de With, and Fons van der Sommen. Improving aleatoric uncertainty quantification in multi-annotated medical image segmentation with normalizing flows. In Uncertainty for Safe Utilization of Machine Learning in Medical Imaging, and Perinatal Imaging, Placental and Preterm Image Analysis , pages 75–88, Cham, 2021. Springer International Publishing. [11] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , NIPS ’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Associates Inc. [12] Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V. Le. Regularized evolution for image classifier architecture search. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Thirty-First Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence Conference and Ninth AAAI Symposium on Educational Advances in Artificial Intelligence , AAAI’19/IAAI’19/EAAI’19. AAAI Press, 2019. [13] Yarin Gal and Zoubin Ghahramani. Dropout as a bayesian approximation: Representing model uncertainty in deep learning. In Maria Florina Balcan and Kilian Q. Weinberger, editors, Proceedings of The 33rd International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 48 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 1050–1059, New York, New York, USA, 20–22 Jun 2016. PMLR. 17 Neural Architecture Distributions [14] Balaji Lakshminarayanan, Alexander Pritzel, and Charles Blundell. Simple and scalable predictive uncertainty estimation using deep ensembles. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017. [15] Christian F. Baumgartner, Kerem C. Tezcan, Krishna Chaitanya, Andreas M. Hötker, Urs J. Muehlematter, Khoschy Schawkat, Anton S. Becker, Olivio Donati, and Ender Konukoglu. Phiseg: Capturing uncertainty in medical image segmentation. page 119–127, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2019. Springer-Verlag. [16] Simon A. A. Kohl, Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Klaus H. Maier-Hein, Danilo Jimenez Rezende, S. M. Ali Eslami, Pushmeet Kohli, Andrew Zisserman, and Olaf Ronneberger. A hierarchical probabilistic u-net for modeling multi-scale ambiguities. CoRR , abs/1905.13077, 2019. [17] Raghavendra Selvan, Frederik Faye, Jon Middleton, and Akshay Pai. Uncertainty quantification in medical image segmentation with normalizing flows. In Mingxia Liu, Pingkun Yan, Chunfeng Lian, and Xiaohuan Cao, editors, 

Machine Learning in Medical Imaging , pages 80–90, Cham, 2020. [18] Ishaan Bhat, Josien P. W. Pluim, and Hugo J. Kuijf. Generalized probabilistic u-net for medical image segementa-tion. In Carole H. Sudre, Christian F. Baumgartner, Adrian Dalca, Chen Qin, Ryutaro Tanno, Koen Van Leemput, and William M. Wells III, editors, Uncertainty for Safe Utilization of Machine Learning in Medical Imaging ,pages 113–124, Cham, 2022. Springer Nature Switzerland. [19] Fabio De Sousa Ribeiro, Omar Todd, Charles Jones, Avinash Kori, Raghav Mehta, and Ben Glocker. Flow stochastic segmentation networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 14754–14765, October 2025. [20] Lalith Bharadwaj Baru, Kamalaker Dadi, Tapabrata Chakraborti, and Raju S. Bapi. Ambiguous medical im-age segmentation using diffusion schrödinger bridge. In James C. Gee, Daniel C. Alexander, Jaesung Hong, Juan Eugenio Iglesias, Carole H. Sudre, Archana Venkataraman, Polina Golland, Jong Hyo Kim, and Jinah Park, editors, Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2025 , pages 25–35, Cham, 2026. Springer Nature Switzerland. [21] Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. DARTS: Differentiable architecture search. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. [22] Sirui Xie, Hehui Zheng, Chunxiao Liu, and Liang Lin. SNAS: stochastic neural architecture search. In Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. [23] Hieu Pham, Melody Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc Le, and Jeff Dean. Efficient neural architecture search via parameters sharing. In Jennifer Dy and Andreas Krause, editors, Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 4095–4104. PMLR, 10–15 Jul 2018. [24] Han Cai, Chuang Gan, Tianzhe Wang, Zhekai Zhang, and Song Han. Once for all: Train one network and specialize it for efficient deployment. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2020. [25] Eric Jang, Shixiang Gu, and Ben Poole. Categorical reparameterization with gumbel-softmax. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2017. [26] Marius Cordts, Mohamed Omran, Sebastian Ramos, Timo Rehfeld, Markus Enzweiler, Rodrigo Benenson, Uwe Franke, Stefan Roth, and Bernt Schiele. The cityscapes dataset for semantic urban scene understanding. In Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2016. [27] Lei Zhang, Fan Yang, Yimin Daniel Zhang, and Ying Julie Zhu. Road crack detection using deep convolutional neural network. In 2016 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP) , pages 3708–3712, 2016. [28] Zhuangzhuang Chen, Zhuonan Lai, Jie Chen, and Jianqiang Li. Mind marginal non-crack regions: Clustering-inspired representation learning for crack segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 12698–12708, June 2024. [29] Elias Kassapis, Georgi Dikov, Deepak K Gupta, and Cedric Nugteren. Calibrated adversarial refinement for stochastic semantic segmentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision ,pages 7057–7067, 2021. [30] Wei Zhang, Xiaohong Zhang, Sheng Huang, Yuting Lu, and Kun Wang. A probabilistic model for controlling diversity and accuracy of ambiguous medical image segmentation. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia , MM ’22, page 4751–4759, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery. 18 Neural Architecture Distributions [31] Wei Zhang, Xiaohong Zhang, Sheng Huang, Yuting Lu, and Kun Wang. Pixelseg: Pixel-by-pixel stochastic semantic segmentation for ambiguous medical images. MM ’22, page 4742–4750, New York, NY, USA, 2022. Association for Computing Machinery. [32] Zhitong Gao, Yucong Chen, Chuyu Zhang, and Xuming He. Modeling multimodal aleatoric uncertainty in segmentation with mixture of stochastic experts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.07328 , 2022. [33] Ting Chen, Ruixiang Zhang, and Geoffrey Hinton. Analog bits: Generating discrete data using diffusion models with self-conditioning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.04202 , 2022. [34] Liang-Chieh Chen, George Papandreou, Florian Schroff, and Hartwig Adam. Rethinking atrous convolution for semantic image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05587 , 2017. [35] Tete Xiao, Yingcheng Liu, Bolei Zhou, Yuning Jiang, and Jian Sun. Unified perceptual parsing for scene understanding. In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV) , pages 418–434, 2018. [36] Jingdong Wang, Ke Sun, Tianheng Cheng, Borui Jiang, Chaorui Deng, Yang Zhao, Dong Liu, Yadong Mu, Mingkui Tan, Xinggang Wang, et al. Deep high-resolution representation learning for visual recognition. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence , 43(10):3349–3364, 2020. [37] Ze Liu, Yutong Lin, Yue Cao, Han Hu, Yixuan Wei, Zheng Zhang, Stephen Lin, and Baining Guo. Swin transformer: Hierarchical vision transformer using shifted windows. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 10012–10022, 2021. [38] Agata Mosinska, Pablo Marquez-Neila, Mateusz Kozinski, and Pascal Fua. Beyond the pixel-wise loss for topology-aware delineation. In 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 3136–3145, 2018. [39] Xiaoling Hu, Fuxin Li, Dimitris Samaras, and Chao Chen. Topology-preserving deep image segmentation. 

Advances in neural information processing systems , 32, 2019. [40] Wei Wang, Kaicheng Yu, Joachim Hugonot, Pascal Fua, and Mathieu Salzmann. Recurrent u-net for resource-constrained segmentation. In 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 2142–2151, 2019. [41] Huajun Liu, Xiangyu Miao, Christoph Mertz, Chengzhong Xu, and Hui Kong. Crackformer: Transformer network for fine-grained crack detection. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 3763–3772, 2021. [42] Mingfei Cheng, Kaili Zhao, Xuhong Guo, Yajing Xu, and Jun Guo. Joint topology-preserving and feature-refinement network for curvilinear structure segmentation. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 7127–7136, 2021. 19