REDUCED-COMPLEXITY ADAPTIVE LOOP FILTERING VIA INPUT-DEPENDENT GRAPH
FILTERS
Wen-Yang Lu, Eduardo Pavez, Antonio Ortega
University of Southern California
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Los Angeles, CA, USA
Roman Chernyak, Shan Liu
Tencent Media Lab
Palo Alto, CA, USA
ABSTRACT
Adaptive Loop Filtering is an important tool for suppressing com-
pression artifacts in modern video codecs. In the enhanced compres-
sion model (ECM), a software test model used for experimenting
with video coding tools beyond Versatile Video Coding, fixed fil-
ters are trained offline and achieve high signal adaptivity via a fine-
grained gradient-based classifier, resulting in a large number of fixed
filters that introduce redundancy and increased implementation com-
plexity. Reducing this redundancy without compromising artifact
suppression, therefore, remains a key challenge. This paper pro-
poses an alternative graph-based fixed-filtering framework for adap-
tive loop filtering. By using a graph to encode pixel-intensity rela-
tionships, our approach captures local structural information more
effectively than gradient-based classification alone. Fixed filters are
learned as polynomial graph filters, enabling structurally similar lo-
cal patterns to share common filtering behavior. Experimental re-
sults demonstrate that the proposed approach achieves a comparable
performance to the ECM baseline while reducing the number of re-
quired filters by an order of magnitude.
Index Terms— Graph signal processing, adaptive loop filtering,
video coding, fixed filters
1. INTRODUCTION
Modern video coding standards rely on in-loop filtering tools to
suppress compression artifacts and improve reconstruction quality.
Among these tools, Adaptive Loop Filtering (ALF) [1, 2] plays
a critical role by refining reconstructed samples through content-
adaptive filtering. By exploiting local signal characteristics, ALF
can effectively reduce artifacts introduced by block-based predic-
tion, transform, and quantization.
In the enhanced compression
model (ECM) [3], a software test model that has been used for
testing video coding tools beyond Versatile Video Coding (VVC)
[4], ALF incorporates both online adaptive filters and a set of offline
trained fixed filters.
These filter outputs are aggregated through
an online-learned Wiener filtering process [1] to generate the final
reconstructed output. The fixed filtering stage aims to provide an ini-
tial level of artifact suppression before online adaptation. To achieve
content adaptivity, ECM employs a fine-grained gradient-based clas-
sifier that assigns reconstructed samples to 7168 classes based on
local directional and activity features. These classes are mapped
to a smaller set of fixed filters that are applied during decoding.
While effective, this design introduces computational complexity
and substantial redundancy: a large number of classes are avail-
able, yet many classes exhibit similar local structures and ultimately
share similar filtering behavior. Reducing the number of fixed filters
without sacrificing filtering performance is therefore important for
achieving low hardware complexity and improved scalability.
Prior studies have mainly focused on reducing the number of
filter sets through online and encoder-side decisions. In VVC [2,
4], filter sets come from two sources: (i) online-trained adaptation
parameter sets (APS), which require the explicit signaling of filter
coefficients, and (ii) offline-trained fixed-filter sets, where only the
set index is transmitted. To reduce the signaling burden, [5] monitors
the usage statistics of these two sources and adaptively disables the
fixed-filter component if it is rarely selected for a given frame. In
addition, [6] reduces the number of transmitted filter sets via class
merging. This method groups classes with similar statistics after
a first-pass classification, thereby reducing the number of distinct
filters sent in the bitstream. In contrast, our work targets redundancy
in the set of fixed filters, enabling a smaller fixed-filter set without
relying on online merging or on/off decisions.
Graph signal processing (GSP) has been successfully applied
to image and video processing tasks [7, 8, 9].
In these applica-
tions, local pixel neighborhoods are represented as graphs whose
edge weights are determined by the intensity difference between
connected pixels. Our work is motivated by the observation that,
since structural information is already captured by the graph, a single
graph filter on an input-dependent graph has the potential to mimic
the filtering of multiple input-independent fixed filters. As an exam-
ple, the popular input-dependent bilateral filter can be viewed as a
single low-pass graph filter on an input-dependent graph [10]. We
expect GSP-based methods to naturally encode pixel-intensity rela-
tionships and local structural information in a manner invariant to
certain geometric transformations, since graphs that differ only by
geometric rotation are mathematically equivalent. These properties
suggest that some neighborhoods assigned to different fixed filters by
the gradient-based classifiers of ECM can be represented by similar
graphs (e.g., rotated versions of the same graph) and can therefore
be processed with a single graph filter. In this paper, we propose a
graph-based fixed filtering framework for ALF, which enables mul-
tiple fixed-filter classes to share the same graph filters, resulting in a
substantially reduced set of fixed filters with practically no impact in
filtering performance.
2. PRELIMINARIES
Consider a weighted undirected graph G = (V, E, W), where V de-
notes a set of vertices that correspond to pixels in an image block,
and E is a collection of edges describing the pairwise similarity be-
tween pixels. Denote the matrix entry wi,j in W as the weight
associated with the edge (i, j) ∈E, and let wi,j = 0 whenever
arXiv:2607.04985v1  [eess.IV]  6 Jul 2026


(a)
(b)
Fig. 1. Example fixed filtering operators on a 9 × 9 diamond neigh-
borhood: (a) baseline fixed-filter coefficients h (color-coded and la-
beled), used in ˆy = h⊤x; (b) 4-connected weighted graph Laplacian
L (thicker edges represent larger weights) used in ˆy = s⊤h(L)x.
(i, j) /∈E. The random-walk Laplacian is then given by
L = I −D−1W,
(1)
where D is the diagonal degree matrix with each diagonal element
di,i equal to the sum Pn
j=1 wi,j. The random-walk Laplacian pro-
vides a normalized representation of local signal variations on the
graph and is widely adopted in graph-based filtering and restoration
tasks [8, 9, 11]. Given an input x ∈RN, in our case, pixel values in
a local neighborhood, defined on the nodes of a graph, a polynomial
graph filter produces an output y ∈RN,
y = h(L)x =
K
X
k=0
bkLkx.
(2)
In fixed filtering for ALF, each pixel inherits a class label from its
corresponding 2 × 2 block, based on fine-grained gradient-based
classification of 7168 classes. It is then filtered using a class-specific
fixed filter defined over a larger local support, i.e., a 9 × 9 diamond-
shaped neighborhood shown in Fig. 1(a). The fixed-filter output is
computed and retained independently for each pixel based on its
assigned class, regardless of whether neighboring pixels share the
same class label. Letting h ∈RN denote the vectorization of class-
specific fixed-filter coefficients, the baseline fixed filtering computes
the center-pixel output via the dot product ˆyFF = h⊤x.
In the graph-based formulation, filtering follows the same per-
pixel procedure. A graph is constructed over a 9 × 9 local neighbor-
hood shown in Fig. 1(b), and only the filter output corresponding to
the center node is retained. This can be expressed by introducing a
selection vector s ∈RN, whose entries are zero except at the center
position, yielding
ˆy = s⊤h(L)x.
(3)
3. GRAPH-BASED FIXED FILTER DESIGN FOR ALF
This section presents the proposed graph-based fixed-filter design,
including the problem formulation, graph construction strategy, and
offline training procedure.
3.1. Problem Formulation
ALF is employed as an in-loop post-processing stage to improve the
quality of reconstructed samples by exploiting local spatial correla-
tions. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the ECM [3] ALF framework con-
sists of three major stages: in-loop prefiltering, fixed filtering, and
Fig. 2. Block diagram of the ECM [3] ALF pipeline. We modify
the fixed filter component by replacing 512 input-independent filters
with 16 graph filters operating on local, input-dependent graphs.
online ALF. The in-loop prefiltering stage includes deblocking fil-
tering (DBF), sample adaptive offset (SAO), and bilateral in-loop
filtering (BIF). In this paper, we focus on the fixed filtering stage,
which in ECM consists of 512 fixed filters (512-FF). We will pro-
pose methods to replace them with a much smaller set of 16 graph
filters (16-GF). Fixed filters constitute an important deterministic
component of ALF. They are trained offline and applied to recon-
structed samples based on local structural characteristics. In ECM,
a gradient-based classifier assigns each 2 × 2 luma block sample to
one of 56 × 8 × 16 = 7168 classes, corresponding to 56 gradient
direction categories characterized by horizontal/vertical and diago-
nal edge strengths (EHV, ED), 8 L2-norm–based activity levels AL2,
and 16 L1-norm–based activity levels AL1.
Let x ∈RN denote the reconstructed pixel intensities within a
local neighborhood, and let y denote the corresponding ground-truth
intensity at the center pixel. Fixed filtering estimates ˆy from x using
a class-dependent linear filter trained offline. Although the classifier
produces 7168 distinct class indices, only 512 fixed filters are trained
and implemented. A predefined many-to-one mapping assigns mul-
tiple gradient-based classes to the same fixed filter, reflecting signifi-
cant redundancy in the classifier space and enabling reduced storage
and implementation complexity. Moreover, the gradient-based clas-
sification and associated fixed filters are not fully rotation-invariant,
as local structures related by geometric rotation may be assigned to
different classes and processed using different filters. As illustrated
in Fig. 3, by applying an appropriate rotation to the 9 × 9 diamond
support, some fixed filters can be revealed to be related: The two
fixed filters of Fig. 3(a) and the two fixed filters of Fig. 3(b) could
each be implemented with a single filter and a suitable rotation of
the pixels in the diamond region.
To address this redundancy, a graph-based representation is in-
troduced to further reduce the number of fixed filters. Each local
neighborhood is modeled as a graph signal, with pixel-intensity re-
lationships encoded through a graph Laplacian constructed for each
training sample. As illustrated in Fig. 4, neighborhoods that differ
only by a geometric transformation (e.g., symmetric or rotations) can
yield isomorphic graphs and Laplacians that are equivalent up to a
node permutation. This allows a single set of graph-based fixed-filter
coefficients to be shared across multiple fixed-filter classes related by
such transformation.
3.2. Graph Construction Strategies
For each training sample, a graph is constructed on the 9 × 9
diamond-shaped local neighborhood centered at the target pixel,
consistent with the support of the fixed filters. Local graphs with
either 4- or 8-connected neighborhoods are considered. An example
of a 4-connected graph is shown in Fig. 1(b), and the corresponding
8-connected graph is obtained by including the diagonal connec-
tions. Given the fixed local connectivity, edge weights are defined
solely in terms of pixel-intensity differences. Specifically, the weight


(a)
(b)
Fig. 3. Examples of rotation-based matching between 512 fixed-
filter classes on the 9×9 diamond support. Colors encode coefficient
values. Left: source class coefficients; middle: source class rotated
by θ (interpolated on the diamond support); right: best-matching
class at angle θ. (a) θ = 45◦: class 78 →class 368. (b) θ = 15◦:
class 170 →class 262.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 4. 1-D toy example showing graph isomorphism. A 5-pixel
row is represented as a weighted path graph with unit edge weights,
except one highlighted edge of weight 2 at: (a) left of center; (b)
right of center.
between two connected pixels i and j is given by
wij = exp

−(xi −xj)2
σ2r

,
(4)
where xi and xj denote the pixel intensities used for the graph con-
struction. This formulation captures local intensity similarity, while
the geometric relationship between pixels is implicitly encoded by
the fixed neighborhood connectivity.
The graph construction is
adapted to the compression noise level by choosing the intensity-
domain bandwidth σr proportional to the quantization step, so more
aggressive filtering is used when larger quantization errors are ex-
pected [12]. Specifically, we define
σr = 0.35 · Qstep,
(5)
where the quantization step size Qstep is given by
Qstep = 2
QP−4
6
.
(6)
The corresponding random-walk Laplacian in (1) is used as the
graph filtering operator in (2). From an implementation perspective,
to avoid redundant computation of edge weights for overlapping
neighborhoods, a weighted graph can be constructed once for the
entire decoded frame. The local graph corresponding to each target
pixel is then obtained by cropping the subgraph associated with its
9 × 9 diamond-shaped neighborhood.
The choice of graph connectivity influences both the expressive-
ness of the local graph representation and the polynomial order re-
quired by the graph filter. As will be shown in Section 4.4, the 8-
connected graph configuration achieves a performance comparable
Algorithm 1 Offline Training of Graph-Based Fixed Filters
Require: Training samples grouped into 512 classes; polynomial
order K; regularization λ; number of clusters M
Ensure: Cluster-level filters {˜bm}M
m=1 and partitions {Cm}M
m=1
1: for c = 1 to 512 do
2:
Construct L(n) for each sample n in class c
3:
Estimate bc via ridge regression (Sec. 3.3)
4: end for
5: Compute clusters {Cm}M
m=1 by weighted K-means on {bc}512
c=1
6: for m = 1 to M do
7:
Aggregate all samples from classes in Cm
8:
Retrain coefficients ˜bm via ridge regression
9: end for
10: return {˜bm}M
m=1 and {Cm}M
m=1
to the 4-connected alternative while reaching its best performance
at a lower polynomial order. This behavior suggests that increased
local connectivity enables more efficient propagation of structural
information through the graph Laplacian.
3.3. Training of Graph-Based Fixed Filters
The full training procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1.
The
proposed graph-based fixed filters are learned offline by exploiting
the existing fixed-filter class structure in ECM. Rather than learn-
ing filters directly from the full classifier space, the learning process
starts from the 512 fixed-filter classes and further reduces redun-
dancy among them through coefficient-space clustering.
3.3.1. Initial Per-Class Training
In the first stage, a graph-based fixed filter is trained indepen-
dently for each of the 512 fixed-filter classes. For a given class, let
{(x(n), L(n), y(n))}Nc
n=1 denote its set of training samples, where
x(n) is the reconstructed input signal defined on the local neigh-
borhood, L(n) is the graph Laplacian constructed for that sample
as described in Sec. 3.2, and y(n) is the corresponding clean target
value. Note that the graph Laplacian is constructed independently
for each training sample, and no shared graph structure is assumed
within a class. For each class, the graph-based fixed filter is pa-
rameterized as a K-th order polynomial graph filter.
The filter
coefficients b = [b0, . . . , bK]⊤are obtained by solving a ridge
regression problem,
min
b
Nc
X
n=1
 
y(n) −s⊤
K
X
k=0
bk
 L(n)kx(n)
!2
+ λ∥b∥2
2,
(7)
where s denotes the selection vector that extracts the center pixel
from the graph filter output, and λ is the regularization parameter,
which we empirically set to λ = 10−2 to prevent excessively large
filter coefficients. This procedure yields 512 sets of graph filter co-
efficients, one for each of the ECM fixed-filter classes.
3.3.2. Coefficient-Space Clustering
To further reduce the number of graph filters, the 512 learned graph
filters are grouped using K-means clustering in the coefficient
space. Each graph filter is represented by its coefficient vector b,
and clustering is performed based on coefficient similarity.
This
coefficient-space clustering reflects similarity in filtering behavior,
enabling classes with similar local neighborhood structures to share


a single graph-based fixed filter. A weighted K-means algorithm
is adopted to address class imbalance, with weights proportional to
the number of training samples per class. Formally, let bi ∈RK+1
denote the graph filter coefficient vector learned for the i-th fixed-
filter class, and let αi denote its associated weight, defined as the
number of training samples in that class. Given a target number of
clusters M, weighted K-means clustering seeks to partition the 512
coefficient vectors into M clusters by minimizing
min
{Cm}, {µm}
M
X
m=1
X
i∈Cm
αi
bi −µm
2
2,
(8)
where Cm denotes the index set of classes assigned to the m-th clus-
ter and µm is the corresponding cluster centroid.
3.3.3. Cluster-Level Retraining
Rather than directly averaging the graph filter coefficients within
each cluster, a second training stage is performed to fully exploit the
aggregated training data. For each cluster, all training samples as-
sociated with the mapped classes are aggregated, and a cluster-level
graph filter is learned by re-solving the ridge regression problem in
(7) using this aggregated training set.
4. DESIGN ANALYSIS AND ABLATION STUDY
This section analyzes the impact of key design choices in the pro-
posed graph-based fixed filtering framework. As illustrated in Fig. 2,
the ALF processing in ECM consists of multiple stages. The recon-
structed signal xrec is first processed by the in-loop prefilters, pro-
ducing the prefiltered signal xpre. This signal is then fed to the fixed
filtering stage, where the fixed filters are applied to generate xFF. Fi-
nally, the online ALF stage aggregates the outputs of the previous
stages and applies Wiener filtering to generate the final reconstruc-
tion xfinal. This multi-stage structure provides multiple candidate
signals that can be used either for graph construction or as training
targets, enabling different design choices.
4.1. Experimental Setup
Experiments are conducted on the BVI-DVC dataset [13], which
contains a diverse set of natural video sequences with varying spatial
and temporal characteristics. A total of 200 sequences are used, with
180 sequences for training and 20 sequences reserved for testing.
Experiments are conducted using the 480×272 resolution, focusing
on luma (Y) samples with 10-bit depth. All experiments are per-
formed at the quantization parameter QP = 37, a typical operating
point for evaluating compression artifacts. Performance is measured
using the mean absolute error (MAE) between the filtered and origi-
nal clean samples. For comparison, we report the error between the
clean input and output at different stages, including (i) samples be-
fore fixed filtering xpre, (ii) fixed filtering output xFF, and (iii) ALF
output xfinal of the ECM baseline under the same experimental con-
ditions.
4.2. Graph Connectivity
Fig. 5 shows the relation between MAE and the number of graph-
based fixed filters (clusters). Fig. 5(a) compares the performance
of 4-connected and 8-connected graph constructions across different
number of clusters. Although the 8-connected graph outperforms
the 4-connected graph when the number of clusters is large, the two
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 5. Comparison of filtering performance in terms of MAE ver-
sus the total number of clusters under different configurations. (a)
Graph construction using either (i) 4-connectivity (grid graph) or (ii)
8-connectivity (8-conn graph). (b) Graph edge weighted computed
from sample (i) before in-loop prefiltering xrec or (ii) after in-loop
prefiltering xpre. (c) Target outputs for training selected to be (i)
original clean samples xclean or (ii) ALF outputs xfinal.
types of graphs perform similarly when the number of clusters is
small, which is the more practical operating point.
4.3. Graph Construction Input and Training Target Selection
Fig. 5(b) compares different choices of reconstructed samples used
to build the graph Laplacian L in (7). We consider samples before
in-loop prefiltering xrec and after in-loop prefiltering xpre. When the
number of clusters is small, constructing graphs from the prefiltered
samples xpre consistently yields better performance. Although us-
ing unfiltered samples xrec may be beneficial when a large number
of clusters is available, this advantage is less relevant to the goal
of reducing the number of fixed filters in modern coding software.
Therefore, graphs constructed from xpre are adopted in the proposed
framework.
The choice of training target y in (7) is also examined in Fig. 5(c)
by comparing two candidate signals: the original clean samples
xclean and the output of the online ALF stage xfinal. Across all set-
tings, using the clean samples as y achieves the lowest MAE. Thus,
clean samples provide the most appropriate supervision, which is
adopted in the proposed framework.
4.4. Number of Clusters and Polynomial Order
In this experiment, graphs are constructed from xpre and clean sam-
ples are used as the target output for training. Fig. 6 shows the re-
lation between MAE and the polynomial order of graph-based fixed
filters. The optimal polynomial order differs between the two graph
connectivity configurations. 8-connected graph achieves its best per-
formance at order K = 5, whereas the 4-connected graph requires
a higher order K = 7 to reach comparable performance. This be-
havior indicates that richer local connectivity enables more efficient
information propagation through the graph Laplacian, allowing a
lower-order polynomial in the filter design.
Moreover, graph-based fixed filters can outperform the origi-
nal fixed filters under appropriate configurations. This suggests that
many of the original 512 fixed-filter classes exhibit similar filter-
ing behavior and can be effectively represented by a compact set of
graph-based filters. Based on these findings, an 8-connected graph
with M = 16 clusters and polynomial order K = 5 is selected as a
favorable trade-off between performance and model complexity.


(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 6. Comparison of filtering performance in terms of MAE versus
the filter order under different predefined number of clusters.
Table 1. MAE Performance Comparison
Prefiltered Input
FF Output
GF Output
MAE
22.34
21.23
20.89
Relative
MAE Reduction
0%
5.0%
6.5%
Standard
Deviation
5.50
5.49
5.57
4.5. Performance Comparison
Based on the ablation analysis, we select a configuration that bal-
ances filtering performance and hardware complexity. We use an
8-connected graph constructed from xpre, and train the filters to ap-
proximate xclean, with M = 16 clusters and polynomial order K =
5. The performance of the recommended configuration is evalu-
ated using five-fold cross-validation, with the corresponding stan-
dard deviations reported in Table 1. The ECM fixed filtering (FF
Output) achieves a relative MAE reduction of 5.0%, while the pro-
posed graph-based fixed filtering (GF Output) achieves a larger re-
duction of 6.5%. This improvement is achieved despite reducing
the number of fixed filters from 512 to 16, while using the same
gradient-based classifier for filter selection. The worst performance
is observed for the sequence WoodSJTU, where the GF output in-
creases the MAE from 28.57 for the prefiltered input to 29.02. This
sequence contains dense, thin tree structures with strong backlight-
ing and lens flare, where smoothing can easily introduce distortion.
To further evaluate generalization, we directly apply the GFs trained
on the BVI-DVC dataset to the JCT-VC Class C dataset [14], which
consists of uncompressed sequences with a resolution of 832 × 480.
On this dataset, the MAE of the prefiltered input is 4.51. The pro-
posed GF output achieves an MAE of 4.38, close to the ECM FF
output MAE of 4.35. These results demonstrate that the proposed
graph-based framework can more effectively suppress compression
artifacts while using a substantially smaller set of fixed filters.
Fig. 7. Mapping from ECM’s gradient-based classifier classes to the
learned graph filter (GF) indices. Each cell corresponds to a single
original gradient-based class, and its color denotes the assigned GF
index. The horizontal and vertical axes indicate the binned horizon-
tal/vertical and diagonal edge strengths (EHV, ED). Each subplot
corresponds to a different AL1 level (with AL2 = 0). The diagonal
split separates cases with EHV ≥ED and EHV < ED.
4.6. Structural Interpretation of GF Grouping
To further understand the clustering behavior of the proposed graph
filters, Fig. 7 visualizes the mapping from the original fine-grained
gradient-based classes to the learned GF indices.
Overall, the
learned GF combines classes that are similar in both orientation-
related measures and activity levels.
For instance, GF cluster 3
(blue) mainly occupies neighboring cells in the lower-left portion
of the table and across several consecutive AL1 levels. This sug-
gests that the graph-based representation tends to group classes with
structurally similar (i.e., approximately isomorphic) neighborhoods
while reducing the number of distinct filters.
5. CONCLUSION
This paper presented a graph-based fixed filtering framework for
ALF in ECM. By modeling local neighborhoods as graph signals
and learning fixed filters as polynomial graph filters, the proposed
approach captures local structural information more effectively than
gradient-based classification alone. Exploiting structural similarity
in the graph domain enables a compact representation of fixed fil-
ters, substantially reducing redundancy while preserving compatibil-
ity with the existing ALF framework. Experimental results demon-
strate that the proposed method improves fixed-filter performance
compared to the ECM baseline while significantly reducing the num-
ber of required filters. These results suggest that graph-based repre-
sentations offer an effective and scalable solution for fixed filtering
in adaptive loop filtering.


6. REFERENCES
[1] Chia-Yang Tsai, Ching-Yeh Chen, Tomoo Yamakage, In Suk
Chong, Yu-Wen Huang, Chih-Ming Fu, Takayuki Itoh, Takashi
Watanabe, Takeshi Chujoh, Marta Karczewicz, and Shaw-Min
Lei, “Adaptive loop filtering for video coding,” IEEE Journal
of Selected Topics in Signal Processing, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 934–
945, 2013.
[2] Marta Karczewicz, Nan Hu, Jonathan Taquet, Ching-Yeh
Chen, Kiran Misra, Kenneth Andersson, Peng Yin, Taoran Lu,
Edouard Franc¸ois, and Jie Chen, “Vvc in-loop filters,” IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology,
vol. 31, no. 10, pp. 3907–3925, 2021.
[3] Muhammed Coban, Ru-Ling Liao, Karam Naser, Jacob Str¨om,
and Li Zhang, “Algorithm description of enhanced compres-
sion model 19 (ecm 19),” JVET-AN2025, Dec. 2025.
[4] Benjamin Bross, Ye-Kui Wang, Yan Ye, Shan Liu, Jianle Chen,
Gary J. Sullivan, and Jens-Rainer Ohm, “Overview of the ver-
satile video coding (vvc) standard and its applications,” IEEE
Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology,
vol. 31, pp. 3736–3764, 2021.
[5] Jiayue Fang and Fuzheng Yang, “The optimization of adap-
tive loop filter based on the reduction of the filter sets,”
in
2023 International Conference on Ubiquitous Communication
(Ucom), 2023, pp. 166–170.
[6] Chengkang Huang, Leilei Huang, Chang Liu, Shuocheng
Wang, Ke Xu, and Yibo Fan,
“Fast adaptive loop filter al-
gorithm based on the optimization of class merging,” in 2024
IEEE International Conference on Visual Communications and
Image Processing (VCIP), 2024, pp. 1–5.
[7] Gene Cheung, Enrico Magli, Yuichi Tanaka, and Michael K
Ng, “Graph spectral image processing,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 106, no. 5, pp. 907–930, 2018.
[8] Yongzhe Wang, Antonio Ortega, Dong Tian, and Anthony
Vetro, “A graph-based joint bilateral approach for depth en-
hancement,” in 2014 IEEE International Conference on Acous-
tics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2014, pp. 885–
889.
[9] Xianming Liu, Gene Cheung, Xiaolin Wu, and Debin Zhao,
“Random walk graph laplacian-based smoothness prior for soft
decoding of jpeg images,” IEEE Transactions on Image Pro-
cessing, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 509–524, 2017.
[10] Akshay Gadde, Sunil K Narang, and Antonio Ortega,
“Bi-
lateral filter: Graph spectral interpretation and extensions,”
in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing.
IEEE, 2013, pp. 1222–1226.
[11] Peyman Milanfar,
“A tour of modern image filtering: New
insights and methods, both practical and theoretical,”
IEEE
Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 106–128, 2013.
[12] Per Wennersten, Jacob Strom, Ying Wang, Kenneth Anders-
son, Rickard Sjoberg, and Jack Enhorn, “Bilateral filtering for
video coding,” in 2017 IEEE Visual Communications and Im-
age Processing (VCIP), 2017, pp. 1–4.
[13] Di Ma, Fan Zhang, and David R. Bull, “Bvi-dvc: A training
database for deep video compression,” IEEE Transactions on
Multimedia, vol. 24, pp. 3847–3858, 2022.
[14] Frank Bossen, “Common test conditions and software refer-
ence configurations,” Tech. Rep. JCTVC-L1100, Joint Collab-
orative Team on Video Coding (JCT-VC), 2013.
