JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
1
Motion Estimation Techniques for Volumetric Video
Attribute Compression
Haoran Hong, Eduardo Pavez, Antonio Ortega, Ryosuke Watanabe, Keisuke Nonaka
Abstract—Point cloud compression relies on techniques to
compress both geometry and attributes. Motion-based approaches
for dynamic solid point cloud geometry compression within the
geometry-based point cloud compression (G-PCC) framework
have achieved significant reductions in geometry rate. However,
motion-based techniques for attribute compression remain under-
explored, making it challenging to achieve significant reductions
in the temporal redundancy of attributes. Firstly, this paper
proposes a geometry-based inter-coding scheme to compress the
attributes of dynamic solid point clouds. Secondly, a graph-based
motion-estimation scheme for point-cloud attribute compression
is proposed. Thirdly, an interpolation-free fractional-voxel motion
estimation method is proposed to refine motion accuracy to
fractional-voxel precision. Our experimental results on the MPEG
point cloud dataset show that the proposed scheme outperforms
G-PCC, GeS-TM, and V-PCC in lossless and lossy geometry
conditions. We achieve average bitrate savings of 55.3%, 42.3%,
and 16.5% over G-PCC, GeS-TM, and V-PCC, respectively, under
lossy-geometry conditions.
Index Terms—Dynamic point clouds, volumetric video, motion
estimation, inter-prediction
I.
INTRODUCTION
Recent progress in 3D acquisition and reconstruction tech-
nology enables the capture of 3D scenes, resulting in volu-
metric videos with high frame rates and resolutions. These
volumetric videos have been applied across various fields,
including 3D immersive telepresence, autonomous vehicle
navigation, gaming, and animation [1], [2]. Point clouds,
collections of points, each with its position (geometry) and
associated attributes (e.g., YUV or RGB color), are well-suited
for volumetric videos since they can represent arbitrary objects
and scenes in three-dimensional space. Temporally acquired
point clouds, arranged as an ordered set of frames accord-
ing to timestamps, are called dynamic point clouds. When
those points are dense enough to form continuous surfaces,
dynamic point clouds are called dynamic solid point clouds
[3] (DSPCs). DSPCs in raw format would require a huge
amount of bandwidth for transmission. Thus, there has been
a significant interest in point cloud compression techniques,
Haoran Hong, Eduardo Pavez and Antonio Ortega are with the University
of Southern California, 3740 McClintock Ave., Los Angeles, CA 90089-2564,
USA (e-mail: haoranho@usc.edu; pavezcar@usc.edu; aortega@usc.edu).
Ryosuke Watanabe and Keisuke Nonaka are with KDDI Research,
Inc.,
2-1-15
Ohara,
Fujimino,
Saitama,
356-8502,
Japan
(e-mail:
ru-
watanabe@kddi.com; ki-nonaka@kddi.com).
leading to two MPEG standardization efforts [2], [4]: Video-
based point cloud compression (V-PCC) and geometry-based
point cloud compression (G-PCC).
In V-PCC [4], 3D DSPC are converted into 2D videos,
which are then compressed using conventional video codecs,
such as HEVC and VVC. Key benefits of V-PCC include
its reliance on existing 2D compression techniques to re-
move temporal redundancies among frames and its ability
to incorporate future video coding innovations to further
enhance performance. However, 3D point clouds are usually
a sampled representation of complex, non-developable sur-
faces whose geometry cannot be perfectly unfolded into 2D
without distortion. Converting them into 2D atlases requires
patch segmentation and projection that locally approximate the
surface as piecewise planar regions. These segmentation-and-
projection operations can introduce point loss and temporal
inconsistencies across frames, making lossless compression
inefficient when those lost and inconsistent points must be
preserved. Normal-based segmentation cannot be consistent
across frames because DSPCs undergo non-rigid deformation,
self-occlusion, and viewpoint-dependent sampling changes,
resulting in variations in surface normals and local topology
over time. As a result, regions that form a single patch in
one frame may be split into multiple patches in the next,
or vice versa. This temporal inconsistency disrupts 3D voxel
correlations and introduces artificial motion discontinuities,
even when the underlying 3D motion is smooth. The problem
is further amplified by patch packing during projection, which
arranges patches in a 2D atlas in a descending order of patch
size. This may result in two spatially adjacent or motion-
corresponding regions in 3D being placed at unrelated 2D
locations in different frames. Consequently, smooth 3D motion
may appear to exhibit abrupt spatial jumps in 2D video. Such
discontinuities degrade inter-frame efficiency in HEVC/VVC,
leading to unnecessary bitrate consumption due to both poorer
prediction and lossless motion vector encoding of non-smooth
motion fields.
In G-PCC, point clouds are directly encoded using 3D
compression techniques, eliminating the need for a 3D-to-2D
projection. G-PCC was initially used for static point clouds
and dynamically acquired LiDAR point clouds, leading to the
development of several intra-coding approaches for attribute
data [5–10]. Following the release of the second version of
G-PCC, an exploration [11], [12] to extend it for attribute
compression in DSPCs was initiated. This led to the MPEG
geometry-based solid test model (GeS-TM), in which block-
based motion estimation (ME) and Region-Adaptive Hierar-
chical Transform (RAHT)-based motion compensation (MC)
[13] strategies are proposed for attribute inter-coding, resulting
arXiv:2607.03576v1  [eess.IV]  3 Jul 2026


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
2
in significant bitrate savings compared to intra-only G-PCC.
However, current G-PCC inter-coding techniques have major
limitations. In some approaches [14], [15], inaccurate color
compensation may occur because integer-precision motion is
independently computed for each block based solely on geom-
etry, i.e., without (i) utilizing color information, (ii) considering
motion correlation across blocks, or (iii) allowing fractional
motion displacements. Second, systems that use both color and
geometry for MC, such as GeS-TM using RAHT [11], [13],
[16], [17], apply MC only in the top few levels of the octree
hierarchy, i.e., on a coarsely approximated version of the point
cloud, which makes it inherently less accurate than MC on the
original full-resolution point cloud.
To address these limitations, we propose novel ME and MC
tools for inter-coding. Our ME scheme achieves accurate fine-
resolution MC by using a strategy that is essentially equivalent
to ME after super-resolving the geometry and color. In our
approach, MVs for all blocks are jointly estimated in a pro-
gressive manner. First, we define a graph-based integer voxel
ME (IvME), combining block-wise matching based on both
color and geometry with a graph-based motion smoothing that
constrains motion to be smooth across blocks. This is followed
by a locally refined IvME and interpolation-free fractional
voxel motion estimation (IF-FvME). With our proposed FvME,
fractional voxel displacements can be estimated without first
generating (via interpolation) a higher resolution point cloud.
Our proposed ME/MC scheme can be combined with existing
G-PCC transform methods.
Our work in this paper builds on our preliminary work
[18], [19], but introduces major improvements. In [18], we
proposed a block-based ME scheme in which the MV for each
block is estimated independently. However, this independent
estimation fails to capture spatial correlations and interactions
among neighboring blocks. As a result, the estimated MVs lack
local consistency, leading to visually and structurally undesir-
able artifacts in the motion-displaced point cloud, including
tearing, cracking, and shape distortions, particularly at block
boundaries. In this paper, we propose a graph-based motion
estimation approach that estimates block motion globally by
introducing a graph-based penalty term that promotes smooth,
coherent MVs across neighboring blocks, thereby achieving
more accurate motion compensation.
In [19], we introduced an interpolation-based
FvME
method, where fractional-voxel motion compensation is per-
formed by explicitly interpolating reference samples and evalu-
ating the FvMC error at discrete candidate fractional positions.
Although effective, this approach requires explicit sub-voxel
interpolation and exhaustive FvMC error evaluation for all
candidate fractional displacements, which becomes expensive
when finer fractional precision is desired. In this paper, we pro-
pose an interpolation-free (IF) FvME scheme that reformulates
fractional motion estimation as a global optimization problem
over interpolation coefficients. Starting from the integer motion
field obtained by the proposed graph-based IvME, each block
first collects 27 local integer-voxel MC predictors from the
neighborhood around its IvMV. The fractional-voxel predictor
is then generated as a weighted combination of these IvMC
predictors, where the weights correspond to interpolation coef-
ficients rather than explicitly interpolated sub-voxel samples.
Instead of directly searching for fractional displacement for
each block, IF-FvME optimizes the interpolation coefficients
by minimizing an MC residual cost. This formulation provides
fractional-precision MC without the computational overhead
of explicit sub-voxel interpolation and exhaustive FvMC error
evaluation. It also enables finer motion precision, e.g.,
1
4-
voxel motion, with significantly lower complexity than [19].
The proposed IF-FvME can be viewed as a 3D point-cloud
generalization of interpolation-free fractional motion estima-
tion in conventional video coding, where the fractional motion
vector is inferred from a local model of the MC error surface
rather than by direct fractional interpolation [20]. Furthermore,
unlike our previous approach [19], which operated on a
precomputed IvMV database generated by exhaustive search
[21], the proposed IF-FvME is integrated with our graph-
based IvME scheme. Together, they form a unified integer-
to-fractional motion estimation pipeline that jointly exploits
color-geometry matching, global motion-field optimization,
and coding-oriented residual regularization.
Unlike in [18], [19], where we used transform coding based
on the graph Fourier transform, our proposed IvME and IF-
FvME schemes are combined with the G-PCC [22] transform
coding framework and can operate with either lossless or lossy
geometry coding. The differences between [18], [19] and this
work are summarized in Table I. Our main contributions are:
•
A voxel-domain attribute inter-prediction pipeline in-
cluding fractional precision ME and MC. This pipeline
is integrated into the latest G-PCC codec to encode
attributes on either lossless or lossy coded geome-
try, demonstrating the potential of geometry-based ap-
proaches for point cloud attribute coding (Section III).
•
IvME: a graph-based motion estimation scheme for
DSPC attribute compression that promotes motion
smoothness across blocks (Section IV).
•
FvME: an interpolation-free fractional-precision ME
scheme for DSPC attribute compression that avoids ex-
plicit point-cloud super-resolution and optimizes block-
wise FvMVs in a continuous interpolation coefficient do-
main to improve residual coding efficiency (Section V).
•
An experimental setup that isolates the effect of lossy
geometry coding in attribute compression by comparing
the proposed methods under different types of geometry
compression, thus providing a fair comparison with the
state-of-the-art in attribute coding (Section VI).
We achieve significant gains over state-of-the-art V-PCC, G-
PCC, and GeS-TM under lossy and lossless geometry coding
conditions (Section VI), as well as our earlier work [18], [19].
II.
RELATED WORK
DSPCs represent object surfaces that can be deformed
and translated over time, so the number of occupied voxels
and their distribution within a 3D volume can vary. These
temporal changes and irregular spatial sampling complicate
the establishment of a simple correspondence between voxels
across consecutive frames, making the development of ME and
MC techniques for G-PCC more challenging than for V-PCC.


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
3
In particular, while conventional video codecs estimate motion
by comparing color information from blocks of the same size
(same number of pixels), an ME estimation algorithm for G-
PCC must compare regions where voxels are sparse in 3D, and
where their numbers and positions differ across consecutive
frames due to non-rigid motion. Thus, to successfully achieve
ME/MC for PCs, both color and geometry matching should
be considered. Next, we review existing ME and MC schemes
for 3D point clouds.
A. Motion Estimation (ME)
Block matching based ME methods for 3D point clouds [25–
27] mimic video coding approaches by using 3D block-wise
comparison. Each predicted block is exhaustively compared
with all candidate blocks using a color and geometry distance
criterion. The block with the minimum distance is considered
the best match, and the corresponding displacement is the
estimated motion. Since the ME distance criterion depends on
two distinct point cloud characteristics (color and geometry),
optimization involves evaluating all candidate displacements
via exhaustive search. This leads to high computational com-
plexity, making such methods potentially prohibitive for large
search ranges. Furthermore, these methods estimate motion
independently for each block, which can lead to inconsis-
tent motion vectors across neighboring blocks and blocking
artifacts, thereby reducing coding efficiency. Our proposed
approach overcomes the limitations of these methods by uti-
lizing geometry and color matching in two separate stages to
reduce complexity, enable practical fractional ME, and produce
spatially coherent motion across blocks.
In point registration-based ME, two types of registration
techniques are considered. In graph matching [28], spectral
matching is applied between the sampled voxels in the ref-
erence and predicted frames to establish voxel-wise corre-
spondence. The motion for the remaining voxels is computed
based on their positions relative to the globally matched
sampled voxels, subject to a geometry-smoothness constraint.
Geometric-ICP applied to each prediction unit [14], [15], [29]
extracts the nearest point set and estimates rigid motion (e.g.,
rotation and translation) iteratively. For efficient signaling,
the rotation matrix is represented as a quaternion. Note that
both point registration techniques ignore color during ME,
which may lead to suboptimal motion estimates for color
prediction. Moreover, these approaches do not guarantee a
smooth motion field. While these methods rely solely on
geometry and estimate each block’s motion independently,
our graph-based motion estimation scheme integrates a color-
geometry similarity metric and globally optimizes block-wise
motion field through a regularization term. This yields motion
vectors that are not only better aligned with color attributes
but are also spatially coherent, resulting in a more reliable
initialization for subsequent color-driven refinement.
Recently, learning-based ME has also been explored for
point cloud video compression. U-Motion [30] proposes a
learned point cloud video codec with a U-structured, multiscale
inter-frame prediction module, in which explicit motion esti-
mation and compensation are performed in the latent feature
domain. Although this learned framework improves temporal
prediction by exploiting multiscale motion features, it relies on
neural network training, latent-domain motion representations,
and learned entropy models, which makes it less interpretable
and less directly controllable than explicit optimization-based
ME. In addition, the estimated motion is implicitly optimized
via rate-distortion training rather than by directly enforcing
block-level color-geometry matching and spatial smoothness
constraints.
B. Motion Compensation (MC)
Transform-domain MC predicts the transform coefficients of
the current frame from those of motion-compensated frames.
Since RAHT is the most widely adopted transform in attribute
coding, e.g., in G-PCC, several transform-domain MC schemes
[11], [13], [16], [17] have been developed based on RAHT.
However, due to geometric discrepancies and the exponentially
increasing signaling overheads, RAHT-domain MC is gener-
ally restricted to the upper levels of the octree, which limits
its benefits for coding because coarser compensation results in
higher residual energy than finer compensation.
Alternatively,
in
voxel-domain
MC
methods,
motion-
displaced reference point attributes are mapped onto the cur-
rent frame using nearest neighbor projections. In previous work
[18], [19], we show that gains over intra-coding are not guaran-
teed for all blocks undergoing inter-coding. Many blocks may
suffer from degraded prediction quality, resulting in overall
rate-distortion loss. Previous work has addressed this issue
by allowing per-block inter- and intra-mode decisions [31].
As an alternative, filtering approaches have been proposed to
improve the quality of the predictors, by averaging attributes
from multiple nearest neighbor voxels for MC [28] or applying
the spatial-temporal Gaussian Markov random field (GMRF)
model of [32] to the nearest neighbor predictors [14]. Both can
be viewed as techniques using weighted averaging of multiple
IvMCs. However, the effectiveness of GMRF-based prediction
strongly depends on how well the underlying color covariance
structure conforms to the assumed GMRF, which is constructed
solely from geometric information and may not accurately
capture attribute variation. In our previous work [19], we
proposed adaptive weighted averaging of multiple reference
attributes through fractional voxel interpolation. While this
improves prediction quality, it comes at the cost of signifi-
cant computational complexity. Each finer fractional precision
increases the number of fractional voxels by a factor of eight,
requiring repeated nearest-neighbor searches through kd-tree
traversals.
Our proposed interpolation-free FvME generalizes existing
techniques for weighted averaging of IvMCs. It uses the fact
that the unknown color of a fractional voxel is estimated
through trilinear interpolation from its surrounding integer-
voxel neighbors, where the interpolation weights depend on the
fractional motion vector. Rather than performing voxel interpo-
lation for each candidate fractional motion vector and selecting
the best match, we directly estimate the optimal real-valued
interpolation weights on a convex set, then compute the best
fractional displacement that matches them. This perspective


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
4
Techniques
IvME
FvME
Residue coding
[19]
Database motion [21]
Interpolation-based
GFT[23]+RLGR[24]
[18]
Block based Color-ICP
Adaptive graph filtering
GFT[23]+RLGR[24]
Proposed
Graph-based isometric ME
Interpolation-free
G-PCC[22]
TABLE I: Comparison of our proposed approach with our previous approaches in [19] and [18]
results in lower energy residuals and a more computationally
efficient FvME, because no explicit interpolation or costly
spatial searches are required.
Fig. 1: The pipeline of the motion-based inter-coding scheme. The blue
boxes represent the proposed inter-prediction techniques. Grey boxes represent
functions identical to those in G-PCC.
III.
PIPELINE OVERVIEW
We focus on 3D block-based ME/MC for attribute com-
pression within the G-PCC framework. As in G-PCC and V-
PCC, the geometry is encoded first, followed by recoloring
and color compression. Our proposed scheme is compatible
with both lossless and lossy geometry coding and assumes
that the decoded geometry is available at the encoder and the
decoder. When geometry is encoded losslessly, the original
point-to-color correspondence remains intact, and recoloring
is unnecessary. However, under lossy geometry coding, both
the number and spatial distribution of points may change,
disrupting the original one-to-one mapping between points
and their associated color attributes. Thus, a recoloring step
transfers color values from the original point cloud to the new
point cloud obtained from reconstructed (coded) geometry.
Next, we provide an overview of our approach (Figure 1).
1) Block partition: A dynamic point cloud is a sequence of
T point clouds, each of which is referred to as a frame. The
frame at time t has Nt points, which can be represented as
an unordered point set Pt. Each point is p ∈Pt is denoted
by its Cartesian coordinates p = (x, y, z). Its associated color
attribute is denoted by c(p) in YUV format. The predicted (or
current) frame Pt is partitioned into non-overlapping 3D blocks
(e.g., using an octree). The b-th block currently being predicted
is denoted by the set Pb ⊆Pt. The reference frame is the
previously coded frame, denoted by Pt−1. For each block, we
estimate an isometry-regularized motion, defined as a block-
level translation that approximates isometry deformation. This
motion provides a physically plausible alignment that closely
approximates the underlying motion between Pb and a corre-
sponding region in Pt−1, and serves as the basis for subsequent
motion estimation tailored for color prediction.
2) Graph-based
integer
voxel
motion
estimation
(Sec-
tion IV-C): The first stage is graph-based integer voxel motion
estimation (IvME), which formulates motion estimation as
a global optimization problem over all blocks. Specifically,
IvME performs a color-aware ICP search over a large region
in the reference frame, while incorporating a graph-based regu-
larization term to enforce structural consistency. The objective
function consists of a fidelity term and a regularization term.
The fidelity term measures geometric and color consistency
between the current and reference frames, while the regular-
ization promotes smooth motion across blocks and preserves
structural consistency during fitting.
3) Locally-refined integer voxel motion estimation (Sec-
tion IV-D): In the previous step, block motion is estimated over
a large candidate region by jointly considering geometry, color,
and graph-based smoothness. However, while jointly using
geometry and color is beneficial for recovering a physically
meaningful and realistic motion field, attribute coding ulti-
mately benefits from minimizing the color prediction residual
in the reconstructed reference. Thus, to further improve graph-
based motion in terms of color prediction, we propose a
Locally Refined IvME that starts from the estimate from the
previous step and refines it within a small neighborhood so
as to be locally optimal for color prediction, while largely
preserving the geometric consistency and cross-block smooth-
ness imposed by the previous step. Furthermore, this two-step
strategy is computationally more efficient than exhaustively
optimizing a color-only objective over the full search region,
while still exploiting geometry, color, and cross-block smooth-
ness to obtain a physically meaningful initialization [14], [25].
4) Integer voxel motion compensation (Section IV-B): After
IvME, the predicted block is displaced by m within the recon-
structed reference frame. MC is then carried out by locating,
for each voxel in the current frame, the nearest neighbor at
the displaced position in the coded reference frame and using
the attributes of the nearest motion-displaced neighbors to
predict the current block, thereby yielding IvMC. Note that
the geometry for Pt and Pt−1 is available at the decoder and
therefore given the motion m for any point in a block in Pt,
it is possible to search for the nearest points in Pt−1.
5) Fractional voxel motion estimation and compensation
(Section V): FvME is an optional refinement tool designed
to improve the resolution or precision of IvMVs from integer-
voxel accuracy to fractional-voxel accuracy. Instead of explic-
itly generating sub-voxel point-cloud samples and evaluating
the FvMC error at each candidate fractional position, the
proposed interpolation-free FvME first estimates interpola-


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
5
tion weights that form a convex combination of the IvMC
predictors around each integer motion point. These weights
are independently optimized within blocks by minimizing
motion-compensation residuals. Next, the estimated weights
are quantized to the nearest feasible trilinear coefficient vector
on a predefined fractional-resolution grid. Each grid point cor-
responds to a specific fractional displacement, i.e., a candidate
FvMV. The quantized trilinear coefficients associated with
the selected grid point are used to generate the final FvMC
through the trilinear interpolation. Note that the interpolation-
free FvME also improves ME efficiency. An exhaustive search
over all discrete fractional displacements may outperform our
interpolation-free approach, but at a significantly higher cost.
6) Transform and Quantization: After motion compensa-
tion, the residues are the difference between the original
color signal and the motion-compensation color signal. These
residual color attributes are then encoded using the standard
coding tools in G-PCC [22]: attribute transform, e.g., RAHT,
and entropy coding, e.g., run-length Golomb-Rice coder.
IV.
INTEGER VOXEL MOTION ESTIMATION AND
COMPENSATION
Our proposed IvME algorithm consists of two steps. The
first step, graph-based motion estimation, is summarized in
Algorithm 1 and described in detail in Section IV-C. Graph-
based IvME produces a motion vector per block ˜t ∈R3×1.
These MVs are obtained from color and geometry information
of both the predicted and reference point clouds and are regu-
larized using graph-based distance preservation. In the second
step, since the motion must be used for color compression,
we introduce a local motion estimation refinement to obtain
a new motion vector ˆt ∈R3×1 to reduce the energy of the
color residuals. For this, we first explain how to perform MC
from the nearest neighbor at the motion-displaced position and
obtain color residuals (Section IV-B). In the motion refinement
step (Section IV-D), the IvME of each block ˆt is refined to
minimize the energy of the MC color residual, resulting in the
overall integer motion for each block:
t′ = ˜t + ˆt.
(1)
A. Graph Representations for Point Clouds
We use graphs to connect spatially neighboring points in
a point cloud, enabling us to apply graph signal processing
for ME. A graph is defined as G = (V, E), where V is the
set of N vertices and E ⊆V × V is the set of edges. The
i-th vertex is denoted vi ∈V and the edge connecting vi and
vj is denoted as eij ∈E. The weight of an edge is denoted
as wij. We use the n × n combinatorial Laplacian matrix,
L = D−W = UΛUT, where the degree matrix D is a n×n
diagonal matrix with Di,i = di = P
j wij, and U and Λ
are the eigenvector and eigenvalue matrices of L, respectively.
Given a graph signal f ∈Rn, its smoothness is quantified by:
f ⊤Lf =
X
i,j:eij∈E
wij(f[i] −f[j])2,
(2)
which is smaller (i.e., has lower variation) when f is smoother.
B. Motion-based Inter Coding Overview
In this subsection, we explain how to obtain the MC color
residuals from arbitrary block-based motion vectors, such as
the ones from [18], [21]. In the following subsections, we
explain our proposed approach for obtaining these motion
vectors. The voxel coordinates of the current and reference
frames are represented by the matrices
Pt = (p1, . . . pNt)⊤∈RNt×3,
(3)
Pt−1 = (p′
1, . . . , p′
Nt−1)⊤∈RNt−1×3.
(4)
We will also denote the voxels as sets Pt = {p1, · · · , pNt}
and Pt−1 = {p′
1, · · · , p′
Nt−1}, respectively. To simplify the
notation, we replace Nt by N in what follows. To obtain the
block structure, the voxelized points in Pt are first sorted in
Morton order so that spatially neighboring voxels within the
same block are placed contiguously in the ordered sequence.
An octree representation is then used to partition Pt into B
non-overlapping blocks [23], [33]. We index these blocks by
{1, 2, . . . , B}. The block assignment matrix B ∈{0, 1}N×B
links each point pi in Pt to its block:
Bib =
1,
if pi ∈Pb,
0,
otherwise,
(5)
where Pb ⊂Pt is the the set of points in the bth block.
Given a block-wise motion field T = (t1, · · · , tB)⊤, the
corresponding point-wise motion field D is:
D(T) = BT = (d1(T), · · · , dN(T))⊤∈RN×3,
(6)
where di(T) = tb if pi ∈Pb. The displaced coordinates of
the current frame are expressed as:
˜Pt(T) = Pt + D(T) = (˜p1(T), . . . , ˜pN(T))⊤.
(7)
Note that, unlike 2D videos, whose pixel values lie on a
regular 2D grid, 3D DPCs have irregular geometry, so only
some positions in the regular 3D grid contain information.
Thus, for motion compensation of voxel pi in the current
frame, given its point motion di (ith entry of D(T)), we use
the nearest motion-displaced neighbor in the reference frame
as pi(T):
pi(T) = arg min
p′∈Pt−1
∥˜pi(T) −p′∥2.
(8)
The coordinates of the motion-displaced nearest points in the
reference frame are given by Q:
Q(T) = (p1(T), · · · , pN(T))⊤∈RN×3.
(9)
Then, to predict the color information in pi we use the color
of pi(T) from (8):
˜ci(T) = c(pi(T)), where pi(T) ∈Pt−1.
(10)
Since the block motion T is transmitted as overhead and the
geometries of frames t and t−1 are available, the decoder can
use (8) to find pi(T) for any point pi in frame t. The target
colors of the current frame are stacked into the matrix:
C = (c(p1), · · · , c(pN))⊤∈RN×3,
(11)


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
6
whose i-th row is the color of point pi. Likewise, stacking the
MC of each point into matrix form, we get:
˜C(T) = [˜c1(T), . . . , ˜cN(T)]⊤∈RN×3,
(12)
which is used to compensate C (11) and compute the color
residue, e.g., C −˜C(T), as in Figure 1.
This paper applies the computation of color residuals ex-
plained above using the block-wise motion field given by:
T′ = (t′
1, · · · , t′
B)⊤= ˜T + ˆT ∈RB×3,
(13)
using the graph-based block-wise motion field (Section IV-C)
˜T = (˜t1, · · · , ˜tB)⊤∈RB×3,
(14)
and the locally refined block-wise motion field (Section IV-D)
ˆT = (ˆt1, · · · , ˆtB)⊤∈RB×3.
(15)
C. Graph-based Integer voxel Motion Estimation
IvME aims to optimize T′ in (13) to achieve the best color
prediction between frames Pt and Pt−1 . First, we propose
an iterative procedure to find ˜T, starting with ˜T0 = 0, and
finding ˜Tk for k ≥1 until convergence (Algorithm 1):
•
Step 1: The block-wise motion ˜Tk−1 is used to deform
the point cloud Pt leading to ˜Pt(˜Tk−1) via (7).
•
Step 2: A many-to-one nearest neighbor matching is
performed between ˜Pt(˜Tk−1) and Pt−1, which leads
to the reference point-wise motion field ˜D(˜Tk−1) (see
Section IV-C1).
•
Step 3: The point-wise motion field ˜D(˜Tk−1) is con-
verted into a block-wise motion field, ˜Tk, by solving
the optimization:
˜Tk = arg min
T
D(T) −˜D(˜Tk−1)

2
F + β, reg(T, R),
(16)
where β controls the tradeoff between two terms. The
first term encourages the point-wise motion derived
from block-wise vectors D(˜Tk) to match the “noisy”
unconstrained point-wise motion from nearest-neighbor
matching ˜D(˜Tk−1). The second term is a graph-based
regularizer that promotes spatial smoothness and phys-
ically plausible deformation in D( ˜Tk). The auxiliary
variable R, to be defined below, helps offset the penalty
of rotation deformation.
The above three steps are repeated until convergence to
produce the graph-based IvME (Algorithm 1). In the following
subsections, we present the details of the generation of the
reference motion field ˜D (Step 2) and the formulation of the
objective function (16) and its solution (Step 3).
Algorithm 1: Graph-based IvME Algorithm
Data: Pt−1 and Pt
Result: ˜T = (˜t1, · · · , ˜tB)⊤
Initialize ˜T0 = 0;
while not converged or k ≤kmax do
Step 1: Calculate the motion-displaced coordinates
of the current frame ˜Pt via ˜Tk−1 and (7);
Step 2: Obtain reference dense motion field
˜D(˜Tk−1) (see Section IV-C1);
Step 3: Optimize the block motion field in the
current k-th iteration ˜Tk via (16);
end
1) Reference Point-wise Motion Field: Since our goal is
color compression, we adopt a hybrid distance metric that
jointly considers geometry and color. The hybrid distance
between two points pi and pj, given βp ∈[0, 1], is:
δ(pi, pj) = βp∥pi −pj∥2 + (1 −βp)∥c(pi) −c(pj)∥2.
(17)
Define the matrix S ∈RNt×Nt−1, where each entry is the
distance between a displaced point, ˜pi(˜Tk−1) from (7), in
the current frame and a candidate point, p′
j from (4), in the
reference frame1:
S(˜Tk−1)ij = δ(˜pi(˜Tk−1), p′
j),
˜pi ∈˜Pt, p′
j ∈Pt−1, (18)
The set of many-to-one matching matrices is:
P =


X ∈{0, 1}Nt−1×Nt

Nt−1
X
i=1
Xij = 1 ∀j


.
(19)
The column-sum condition of the above ensures that every
predicted point is assigned to exactly one reference point.
Since the row sums are left free, multiple predicted points
are allowed to match the same reference point, resulting in a
many-to-one matching when solving:
M(˜Tk−1) = arg min
X∈P Tr(S(˜Tk−1)X).
(20)
Equivalently, this optimization independently selects the min-
imum composed distance (17) for each predicted point.
The coordinates of the matched points in the reference frame
are given by ˜Q, which is a function of ˜Tk−1:
˜Q(˜Tk−1) = M(˜Tk−1)
⊤Pt−1,
(21)
allowing us to obtain the reference displacement field ˜D as:
˜D(˜Tk−1) = ˜Q(˜Tk−1) −Pt.
(22)
1We use a kd-tree to find the nearest neighbors for N points, which leads
to a N ×1 vector of the nearest point indices. The space complexity is O(N)
and time complexity is O(N log(N)), instead of O(N2)


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
7
2) Graph-based Regularization: In this section, we first
express the graph Laplacian smoothness of the point-wise
motion field as a pairwise local consistency measure. This pair-
wise measure is aggregated into a block-wise local-consistency
form, which is then converted into a local distance-consistency
form by offsetting the relative edge rotations between neigh-
boring blocks.
The regularization term in (16) is designed to favor iso-
metric deformation, that is, the geodesic distances within the
original shape, given by P, and the new motion-compensated
shape, given by ˜P, are preserved. Since point clouds are
discrete surface samples without explicit surface connectivity,
exact geodesic distances are not directly available. Therefore,
geodesic distance preservation is approximated via local Eu-
clidean distance preservation, modeled using a sparse, locally
connected graph.
For this, we build a distance-based graph on the point cloud
Pt with edge weights defined as:
wij =
1,
if ∥pi −pj∥2 ≤τ,
0,
otherwise.
(23)
We choose τ = 1, rather than τ =
√
2 or τ =
√
3. For
voxelized point clouds, this connects each occupied voxel
only to its face-adjacent neighbors along the principal axes
of the canonical basis. This design ensures that the block-wise
connectivity used later in this section remains sparse while
preserving only the most relevant local interactions between
directly adjacent blocks that share a face.
The smoothness of the point displacement field in (6) is
quantified using the Laplacian quadratic form (2). From (7)
this can be expressed as the difference in point coordinates
before (pi) and after (˜pi) deformation:
Tr(D⊤LD) =
X
eij∈E
∥(˜pi −pi) −(˜pj −pj)∥2 ,
(24)
where we used the fact that wij = 1 if eij ∈E. Rearranging
terms, we have:
Tr(D⊤LD) =
X
eij∈E
∥(˜pi −˜pj) −(pi −pj)∥2 .
(25)
This shows that the regularizer encourages neighboring
points to preserve their relative positions, providing a local-
consistency prior for the estimated motion field.
Since we use block-wise motion, all points within a block
share the same displacement and for any intra-block edge
(i, j), ˜pi −˜pj = pi −pj. Thus, the metric in (25) takes
nonzero values for inter-block edges only. Given a pair of
blocks (a, b), with point sets Pa and Pb, we define the set
of edges connecting them as:
Eab = {(i, j) | (i, j) ∈E, pi ∈Pa, pj ∈Pb, a̸ = b},
(26)
allowing us to define the set of all inter-block edges as:
Einter =
[
1≤a<b≤B
Eab.
(27)
Thus, (25) can be simplified to:
Tr(D⊤LD) = Tr(D⊤LinterD)
=
X
eij∈Einter
∥(˜pi −˜pj) −(pi −pj)∥2 ,
(28)
where Linter is the Laplacian of the graph of inter-block edges.
Note that different translations assigned to two neighboring
blocks can change the orientation of their inter-block edges. In
this case, the deformed edge vector ˜pi−˜pj may not be parallel
to the original edge vector pi −pj, even when their lengths
are the same. Such orientation changes can be unnecessarily
penalized by (28), which measures the norm of the difference
between edge vectors rather than the difference in their lengths.
To eliminate this penalty, we compute a local rotation matrix
Rab that represents the optimal rotation from original to
deformed edges for edges connecting blocks a and b. Next,
a rotation matrix R = (R1, · · · , RNinter)⊤∈R3Ninter×3 is
formed by concatenating all inter-block edge rotation matrices,
where Ninter is the number of block pairs (a, b) for which Eab
is not empty. This leads to our final choice of regularization
for (16), where, to avoid the rotation penalty of (28), we use:
reg(T, R) =
B
X
a=1
B
X
b=a+1
X
eij∈Eab
∥(˜pi −˜pj) −Rab(pi −pj)∥2 .
(29)
By compensating for the local orientation change across each
block boundary, Rab rotates pi −pj to be as close as parallel
to ˜pi −˜pj as possible. (29) reduces the effect of rotation
and mainly penalizes non-isometric motion that stretches and
compresses inter-block edge length [34]. Thus, the inter-block
edges serve as elastic connections that promote isometry-
preserving, coherent block motion during fitting.
3) Explicit Form of the Objective Function (16): Combining
(6) and (22), the first term in (16) can be expressed as:
D(T) −˜D

2
F =
BT −˜D

2
F
= Tr(T⊤B⊤BT −2 ˜D⊤BT + ˜D⊤˜D).
(30)
We then define a sparse matrix K ∈RN×3Ninter containing
all the edge vectors. For each edge (i, j) ∈Eab, letting m =
m(a, b) ≤Ninter be the index of the corresponding block pair,
the corresponding entries of K are:
Ki,3m−2:3m += (pi −pj)⊤,
Kj,3m−2:3m += −(pi −pj)⊤,
(31)
where + = denotes accumulation. If multiple inter-block edges
associated with the same block-pair index m are incident to the
same point, their edge-vector contributions are summed into
the same row segment of K. Then KR ∈RN×3 contains the
locally rotated original inter-block edge vectors for all points.
From (29), the second term in (16) can be written as:
reg(T, R) = 2 Tr(T⊤B⊤LinterBT)
+ 2 Tr(T⊤B⊤(2LinterPt −KR)) −2 Tr(P⊤
t KR).
(32)


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
8
After combining (30) and (32) and removing the constant
term that is not related to T and R, (16) is equivalent to
solving the matrix optimization problem:
min
T,R Tr
 T⊤B⊤(I + 2βLinter)BT

−2 Tr(βP⊤KR)
+ 2 Tr

T⊤B⊤
2βLinterPt −βKR −˜D

.
(33)
4) Optimization: To minimize the objective function (33),
we adopt the alternating block coordinate descent that alter-
nates between finding the optimal rotations ˜R and finding the
optimal block-wise motion field ˜T. We define the inter-block
edge covariance matrix of blocks a and b as:
Ωab =
X
eij∈Eab
(pi −pj)(˜pi −˜pj)⊤= UabΣabV⊤
ab,
(34)
where UabΣabV⊤
ab is the SVD of Ωab.
For fixed T = ˜T, minimizing (33) with respect to R is
a linear optimization problem. The optimal solution of R in
each iteration can be written in closed form as:
˜Rab = arg max
Rab∈SO(3)
⟨Rab, Ωab⟩
= Uab


1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
det(UabV⊤
ab)

V⊤
ab.
(35)
where SO(3) denotes the rotation group in R3.
For fixed R = ˜R, (33) turns into a quadratic optimization
problem with respect to T:
˜T = arg min
T
Tr
 T⊤B⊤(I + 2βLinter)BT

+ 2 Tr

T⊤B⊤
2βLinterPt −βKR −˜D

,
(36)
so the optimal motion field can be written in closed form as:
˜T =
 B⊤(I + 2βLinter) B
−1 B⊤( ˜D + β(K ˜R −2LinterPt)).
(37)
To further improve motion-compensated shape fitting in the
reference frame, we can alternately update ˜T and ˜R for lmax
inner iterations within each outer iteration k. Specifically, at the
beginning of the k-th iteration, we initialize ˜Rk,0 = ˜R(˜Tk−1)
via (35) and then ˜Tk,0 =
˜T( ˜Rk,0) via (37). For the l-
th inner iteration, where 0 < l ≤lmax, we first update
˜Rk,l = ˜R(˜Tk,l−1) via (35), and then update ˜Tk,l = ˜T( ˜Rk,l)
via (37). After lmax inner iterations, the final estimates for the
k-th iteration are given by ˜Rk = ˜Rk,lmax = ˜R(˜Tk,lmax−1)
and ˜Tk = ˜Tk,lmax = ˜T( ˜Rk).
D. Locally Refined Integer voxel Motion Estimation
The previous IvME stage is designed to recover a geo-
metrically meaningful and realistic motion field, rather than
to directly minimize the final color-prediction residual on the
reconstructed reference. To reduce the energy in this residual,
for each block b, we take (37) as the initial motion ˆtb from the
previous stage and apply an exhaustive search within a small
neighborhood to adapt it to the color-prediction objective. Each
coordinate of a locally refined motion vector is restricted to
be an integer in [−1, 1]. Therefore, the candidate set for the
local refinement of a single block is
M =

t = (tx, ty, tz) ∈Z3  −1 ≤tx, ty, tz ≤1
	
=

t(1), . . . , t(27)
	
,
(38)
which contains 27 candidate MVs and t(1), . . . , t(27) are a
fixed enumeration of the 27 integer offsets. For block b,
the refined local offset ˜tb is selected from M. Stacking the
selected offsets of all B blocks yields the refined block-wise
motion field ˜T, i.e., ˜T = (˜t1, . . . ,˜tB)⊤with ˜tb ∈M for all
b. Equivalently, ˜T is searched over
MT =

T = (t1, . . . , tB)⊤ tb ∈M, ∀b
	
.
The refined motion field is then chosen to minimize the color
prediction error of the MC predictor in (10):
ˆT = arg min
T∈MT
C −˜C(˜T + T)

2
F .
(39)
V.
FRACTIONAL VOXEL MOTION ESTIMATION AND
COMPENSATION
The concept of ME with fractional-precision MVs, widely
used in video coding [20], can be extended to point
clouds. When an MV has sub-voxel components, the motion-
compensated predictor must be evaluated at fractional loca-
tions, where no reference voxels exist, and the attribute values
at these locations are obtained as linear combinations of the
attributes of nearby integer voxels. In conventional video,
interpolation-free fractional ME exploits the regular pixel grid.
The fractional displacement is inferred directly on the image
plane from a local model of the MC error surface. Point
clouds lack such a regular structure, so this approach does
not apply directly. Instead, our method estimates the fractional
displacement in the interpolation-coefficient domain.
Weighted combinations of integer-voxel predictors have
already proven effective for point cloud MC, e.g., by averaging
the attributes of multiple nearest neighbors [28] or by applying
model-based filtering to nearest-neighbor predictors [14]. Since
all of these methods compute weighted averages of multiple
IvMC predictors, they can be interpreted as implicit forms
of fractional-voxel MC. However, their averaging weights are
either fixed [28] in advance or derived from a predefined
graph model constructed solely from geometry [14]. The
FvME proposed in this section generalizes these approaches
by directly optimizing averaging weight coefficients for each
block. The philosophy is that, since the FvMVs are explicitly
optimized for each block and each FvMV corresponds to a
unique set of combination weights, FvMC can be viewed as
an adaptive averaging operation tuned to the local attribute
statistics.
The proposed FvME can also be viewed as an interpolation-
free scheme. In our previous interpolation-based FvME [19],
for each candidate fractional motion displacement, voxels at
fractional positions were first explicitly generated by interpo-
lating the geometry and color of neighboring integer voxels.


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
9
Then, the MC error was evaluated at each candidate frac-
tional displacement using interpolated values, so complexity
increased with the number of candidate fractional motions.
In contrast, the proposed method does not generate voxels at
all fractional-displacement positions. Instead, we express the
FvMC predictor as a trilinear combination of IvMC predic-
tors (Section V-A), optimize the combination weights over a
convex relaxation of the feasible set, and map the optimized
weights back to trilinear weights and therefore a valid FvMV
(Section V-B). FvMCs are only computed after this final
step, resulting in a significant reduction in computational
complexity.
A. FvMC modeling
The integer MV computed in Section IV-D for block b is
denoted by t′
b (see (13)). Figure 2a depicts the integer vector
t′
b (in red) surrounded by eight unit cubes whose vertices lie on
the integer grid. The integer neighborhood of t′
b is comprised
of 27 integer positions. A fractional refinement of t′
b is a sub-
voxel offset tb = (tx, ty, tz) ∈[−1, 1]3 selected within one of
these unit cubes. We refer to tb as the FvMV of block b, so
that the overall motion of the block becomes t′
b + tb.
To limit the signaling overhead, FvMVs are restricted to
have a finite resolution. Given a resolution step size r selected
from a finite set:
r ∈
1
2, 1
4, . . . , 1
2L

,
L ∈Z+,
(40)
the set of admissible FvMVs of a single block is
N = {t = (tx, ty, tz) | tx, ty, tz ∈{0, ±r, ±2r, . . . , ±1}} ,
(41)
which uniformly samples [−1, 1]3 with step size r along each
axis. The corresponding block-wise fractional motion field
belongs to
NT =

T = (t1, . . . , tB)⊤∈RB×3  tb ∈N, ∀b
	
.
The original colors (11) and the integer motion compensated
colors (12) can be organized per block as follows:
C =

C⊤
1 , · · · , C⊤
B
⊤∈RN×3,
(42)
˜C(T) = [ ˜C1(t′
1)⊤, . . . , ˜CB(t′
B)⊤]⊤∈RN×3,
(43)
where Cb and ˜Cb(t′
b) ∈RNb×3.
Since the reference frame contains no attribute samples
at fractional positions, we define the FvMC predictor at a
fractional displacement as a linear combination of the IvMC
predictors over the local 3 × 3 × 3 neighborhood. With
t(1), . . . , t(27) in M defined in (38), the IvMCs at the 27
integer positions surrounding its motion position are collected
to form FvMC predictors of b-th block ˆCb,27 ∈R3Nb×27:
ˆCb,27 =
 vec( ˜Cb(t′
b +t(1))), . . . , vec( ˜Cb(t′
b +t(27)))

, (44)
whose i-th column is the vectorized IvMC obtained by dis-
placing block b to t′
b + t(i).
To map a FvMV to a FvMC, we attach to each admissible
fractional displacement a sparse trilinear coefficient vector
x(t) ∈R27, whose entries depend on t ∈N, and collect
the block-wise coefficients into
X =

X(T) = (x(t1), . . . , x(tB)) ∈R27×B  T ∈NT
	
.
(45)
The FvMC predictor ˆCb(t) ∈RNb×3 associated with a
fractional displacement t ∈N is then the corresponding
combination of the IvMC candidates:
vec( ˆCb(t)) = ˆCb,27 x(t).
(46)
FvME selects the fractional motion field that minimizes the
energy of the MC residual, accumulated over all points and all
three color channels, as a proxy for its coding rate:
ˆTF =
arg min
T=(t1,...,tB)⊤∈NT
B
X
b=1
Cb −ˆCb(tb)

2
F ,
(47)
which is the fractional-precision counterpart of the integer-
voxel criterion (39). Since the predictor of every point depends
only on the FvMV of its own block, the objective in (47)
separates across blocks, and the search decouples into B in-
dependent problems with (2/r + 1)3 candidate displacements
each. Exhaustive enumeration is feasible at coarse resolutions,
but its cost grows cubically in 1/r as the precision is refined,
e.g., from 729 candidates per block at r = 1/4 to 4,913
at r = 1/8. Moreover, (47) can be recast as a quadratic
program over the coefficient matrices, i.e., over X and its
continuous counterpart. However, neither the finite set X nor
its continuous counterpart is convex, so the problem cannot
be handled directly with standard convex optimization tools.
Based on these observations, we propose a two-stage strategy
in which a continuous solution is first found (independent of
r) and then quantized to resolution r.
B. FvME modeling
1) Convex relaxation: Expanding the squared error in (47)
and discarding the term PB
b=1 ∥vec(Cb)∥2
2 that does not
depend on X, the objective becomes a quadratic on the
interpolation coefficients:
F(X) =
B
X
b=1
Fb(xb),
(48)
where Fb(xb)
=
x⊤
b Qb, Qb
=
ˆC⊤
b,27 ˆCb,27 and qb
=
ˆC⊤
b,27vec(Cb). The optimization in (47) is equivalent to min-
imizing F(X) over the set X of (45):
ˆXF =
arg min
X=(x1,...,xB)∈X
B
X
b=1
Fb(xb).
(49)
Each Qb is positive semi-definite, so every Fb, and therefore
F, is convex. The difficulty in solving (49) is not the objective
but the feasible set, X, which is discrete. We relax this problem
by optimizing over the set
D =

X = (x1, . . . , xB) ∈R27×B  xb ∈E, ∀b
	
,
(50)


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
10
where E = {x ∈R27 | x ≥0, 1⊤x = 1} is the 27-
dimensional probability simplex. Since every trilinear coeffi-
cient vector x(t) is a convex combination of the 27 vertices
with at most eight nonzero entries, X ⊂D. Replacing X by
D in (49) yields the relaxed problem
ˆX∗=
arg min
X=(x1,...,xB)∈D
B
X
b=1
Fb(xb),
(51)
which is a convex quadratic program that can be solved to
global optimality with standard techniques. Moreover, since
the objective is separable, (51) decouples into B independent
27-dimensional subproblems.
2) Frank-Wolfe optimization: We adopt the Frank-Wolfe
algorithm [35], applied to each block independently, which
is particularly well-suited for simplex-constrained problems: it
is projection-free, its linear subproblem amounts to locating
the smallest entry in a 27-dimensional gradient, and the line
search admits a closed-form expression for quadratic objec-
tives. These lightweight iterations are the main source of the
computational efficiency of the proposed FvME.
The 27 IvMC candidates of a block form a 3 × 3 × 3 grid
in which eight unit cubes meet at the center offset t(14) =
(0, 0, 0) (Figure 2). Every admissible FvMV lies in exactly
one of these cubes, so its trilinear coefficient vector x(t) is
supported on that cube’s eight corners. We exploit this structure
by initializing the iteration at the center vertex, which is shared
by all eight cubes,
xb,0 = e(14) ∈E,
(52)
where e(14) is the one-hot vector selecting the IvMC at t(14)
in (44), and by progressively confining the search to a single
cube, once it is identified (see Cube locking below). For block
b, each k-th iteration consists of three steps:
1)
Gradient
computation. Given the current iterate
xb,k−1, the gradient of the bth quadratic objective is
∇Fb(xb,k−1) = 2 (Qb xb,k−1 −qb) ∈R27.
(53)
2)
Linear minimization. The Frank–Wolfe vertex is se-
lected from the current active vertex set Ab,k
⊆
{1, . . . , 27} (defined under Cube locking):
x′
b,k =
arg min
x∈conv{ei: i∈Ab,k}
⟨∇Fb(xb,k−1), x⟩.
(54)
A linear objective over this simplex face attains its
minimum at a vertex, so x′
b,k
= ei∗with i∗
=
arg mini∈Ab,k[∇Fb(xb,k−1)]i, i.e., the index of the
smallest gradient entry among the active vertices.
3)
Line search. With db,k = x′
b,k −xb,k−1, and step size
γ∗
b,k = arg min
γ∈[0,1]
Fb
 (1 −γ) xb,k−1 + γ x′
b,k

(55)
can be written in closed form since Fb is quadratic, so
the update is
xb,k = (1 −γ∗
b,k) xb,k−1 + γ∗
b,k x′
b,k.
(56)
Fig. 2: Steps of the proposed FvME for one block. (a) Geometric view: the
integer MV t′
b (red) sits at the center of its 3×3×3 neighborhood, whose 27
IvMC candidates form eight unit cubes. (b)–(f) Frank–Wolfe on the convex
hull of IvMCs of these displacement candidates (iterate marked by a red open
circle): starting from the center vertex, linear minimization successively selects
vertices 14 →6 →3 that belong to the vertices of the bottom right cube. (b)
linear minimization; (c) line search; (d) cube locking restricts the active set to
a subset of original 27 IvMCs; (e) further iterations refine the iterate within
that the subset; (f) cube locking finally restrict IvMCs of eight displacement
of the right bottom cube, after which the relaxed solution (the red open circle)
is associated to the final FvMV.
Cube locking. Since FW starts at the shared center vertex
t(14) and refines the predictor by repeatedly selecting one
of the 27 vertices, each selected vertex reveals the corner
direction, and hence the cube, toward which the fractional
motion is heading. We use this to shrink the active set Ab,k:
initially Ab,0 = {1, . . . , 27}, and once the selected vertices
have determined the sign along all three axes, the enclosing
cube is fixed and Ab,k is reduced to the corresponding eight
corners, used for the remaining iterations (see Figure 2).
Each block runs its iterations until γ∗
b,k < ϵγ, at which point
the block is considered converged and locked to its current
iterate x∗
b. All blocks terminate after at most fmax iterations.
3) From relaxed weights to the FvMV: Geometrically, the
relaxation enlarges the feasible set of predictors from trilinear
interpolations to arbitrary convex combinations of the 27 IvMC
candidates of each point, i.e., the predicted color of each point
is allowed to lie anywhere within the convex hull of its 27
IvMC candidates in R3. The relaxed solution X∗generally
does not coincide with any valid trilinear coefficient matrix,
i.e., X∗
/∈X in general. It is therefore quantized to the
nearest matrix in X, and the FvMV ˆTF is the grid motion
field associated with the quantized coefficients:
ˆTF = arg min
T∈NT
B
X
b=1
x∗
b −x(tb)
2
2,
(57)
where x∗
b is the bth column of X∗. Due to the cube locking
update during linear minimization, x∗
b is confined to a single
cube. Rounding x∗
b to (41) efficiently produces a valid trilinear
coefficient vector for a given resolution r.


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
11
The selected FvMV ˆTF is entropy coded and transmitted to
the decoder as motion overhead. Since the trilinear mapping
X(·) of (45) is known at both the encoder and the decoder,
the interpolation coefficients X( ˆTF) are recovered from ˆTF
without any additional signaling, and the FvMC predictor is
synchronously constructed at the decoder end as (46).
VI.
EXPERIMENTS
A. Dataset and parameter settings
We evaluate the proposed motion-based inter-coding scheme
for the compression of color attributes on the MPEG
point cloud sequences longdress, redandblack, loot,
soldier, and queen, at a depth resolution of 10. We use
all frames from each sequence for the full test. There are 250
frames for queen and 300 frames for the others.
We implement our proposed DPC attribute inter-coding sys-
tem in a low-delay P configuration, using previously decoded
frames as references. In a group of frames (GoF), containing 32
frames, the first frame is coded in intra mode via RAHT from
G-PCC [6], while all blocks in the remaining frames are coded
in inter mode using our proposed scheme. MC residues are also
transformed by RAHT. The quantized RAHT coefficients and
overheads are entropy-coded by the arithmetic coder. To avoid
high overheads, we use block sizes of 16, 32, and 64 for the
high-, mid-, and low-rate regions, respectively. For each rate
point, the block size is uniform within and across frames. For
graph-based IvME, we choose βp = 0.3 in (17), β = 10 in
(16), kmax = 15 and lmax = 1 for optimization Section IV-C4.
For FvME, we choose fmax = 4 for Frank-Wolfe iterations and
r = 1
4 motion precision for FvMV quantization.
Since HEVC encodes projected images in YUV420 format,
when comparing with V-PCC, decoded quality is measured in
the RGB domain to account for chroma sampling. For a single
frame, the PRSN is
−10 log10
∥Rt −R′
t∥2
2 + ∥Gt −G′
t∥2
2 + ∥Bt −B′
t∥2
2
3 × 2552 × Nt

.
(58)
The PSNR of a point cloud sequence is the average of frame
PSNRs. Rate is measured in bits per input point (bpip),
bpip =
PT
t=1 bt
PT
t=1 Nt
,
bt is the total bitrate required to encode YUV components and
motion overhead (when necessary) of the t-th frame. Nt is the
total number of input voxels in the t-th frame. bt does not
include geometry or occupancy bitrate.
B. Lossless Geometry and Lossy Attribute Case
Test Schemes
GOF
Lossless geometry
Recolor
Lossy attribute
Proposed
32
Octree
N/A
Proposed + RAHT
V-PCCv24
32
HEVC-LD
N/A
HEVC-LD
GeS-TMv3
32
Octree
N/A
InterRAHT
G-PCCv23
1
Octree
N/A
RAHT
TABLE II: Settings summary of our proposed approach and anchor coding
solutions in the experiments on lossless geometry condition. Since geometry
is lossless, color transfer is not needed.
We apply the lossless geometry coding setting to G-PCCv23
[22], GeS-TMv3 [11], and V-PCCv24 [36]. For G-PCC and
GeS-TM, we use octree-based lossless geometry coding. For
V-PCC, both raw and EOM patches are enabled to achieve
lossless geometry encoding. Results are shown in Figure 3.
The proposed method achieves BD-rate reductions of −51.3%,
−31.7%, and −146.4% compared to G-PCC, GeS-TM, and V-
PCC, respectively.
Compared with GeS-TM, our proposed scheme adopts a
more advanced ME scheme tailored to color, using color dis-
tance, motion coherence, and higher motion precision during
search, resulting in more accurate predictors. The proposed
scheme outperforms G-PCC by further reducing temporal
redundancy, while G-PCC can only remove spatial redundancy.
Our proposed scheme achieves significant coding gain at all
rates compared to V-PCC. V-PCC cannot remove the high-
frequency redundancy among the sequentially placed voxels in
the raw and EOM texture patches, which appear as noise-like
patterns, resulting in the worst performance under the lossless-
geometry coding setting.
Point Clouds
BD-BR (%)
Proposed
GeS-TMv3
V-PCCv24
Longdress
-30.3
-11.4
56.1
Soldier
-74.7
-51.9
192.3
Redandblack
-30.7
-20.5
151.6
Loot
-46.5
-28.4
243.4
Queen
-74.4
-46.5
88.9
Average
-51.3
-31.7
146.4
TABLE III: Attribute BD-BR of our proposed approach compared to state-of-
the-art baselines on the Table II settings
C. Lossy Geometry and Lossy Attribute Case
Test Schemes
GOF
Lossy geometry
Recolor
Lossy attribute
Proposed
32
HEVC-LD
V-PCC
Proposed
+
RAHT
V-PCCv24
32
HEVC-LD
V-PCC
HEVC-LD
GeS-TMv3
32
HEVC-LD
V-PCC
InterRAHT
G-PCCv23
1
HEVC-LD
V-PCC
RAHT
TABLE IV: Settings summary of our proposed approach and attribute coding
anchors on lossy geometry condition
We now compare attribute coding schemes using a com-
mon lossy-coded geometry, obtained via lossy reconstruction
from V-PCC under the low-delay configuration, onto which
the original color attributes are transferred using the V-PCC
recolor function. All attribute codecs use the same geometry
and recolored attributes, so the comparison isolates attribute-
coding efficiency from the geometry coding.
V-PCC’s attribute coding performs much better with lossy
geometry than with lossless geometry, because the points as-
signed to raw patches that are expensive to encode are pruned.
Also, the empty pixels between patches are filled with smooth
color to avoid drastic color changes across patch boundaries
and to reduce high-frequency transform coefficients. As a
result, V-PCC’s coding efficiency increases significantly and
approaches that of our scheme.


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
12
Fig. 3: Comparison with the baselines on the Table II settings
Fig. 4: Comparison with the anchors on the Table IV settings
Our scheme outperforms V-PCC, achieving 16.5% BD-
BR savings on average (Table V), suggesting that working
directly in 3D is beneficial. In V-PCC, the generated 2D
patches cannot be guaranteed to remain temporally consistent,
making accurate motion estimation more difficult and resulting
in higher energy in the MC residuals. Additionally, because
segmentation for projection breaks the original 3D correlation,
more MV signaling is typically needed.
Point Clouds
BD-BR (%)
Proposed
GeS-TMv3
V-PCCv24
Longdress
-34.7
-8.1
-34.5
Soldier
-74.1
-39.5
-66.4
Redandblack
-38.2
-14.7 1
-22.2
Queen
-63.1
-20.9
-56.2
Loot
-66.2
-38.2
-55.4
Average
-55.2
-24.27
-46.9
TABLE V: Attribute BD-BR of our proposed approach compared to state-of-
the-art anchors on the Table IV settings
D. Complexity Analysis
PCs
Time Complexity (seconds)
Encoder
Decoder
V-PCC
GeS-TM
Proposed
V-PCC
GeS-TM
Proposed
Seq1
2766.4
95.6
603.2
42.8
24.9
70.2
Seq2
3923.9
85.9
553.4
43.1
22.2
62.4
Seq3
3413.1
126.6
868.7
52.1
32.4
110.7
Seq4
3192.8
113.1
760.2
58.4
27.9
92.7
Seq5
4255.6
95.6
668.4
39.4
24.5
78.1
Average
3550.4
103.4
690.8
47.2
26.4
82.8
Ratio
34.5:1:6.7
1.8:1:3.1
TABLE VI: Encoding and decoding time of a single GoF including 1 I-
frame and 31 P-frames. Seq1-Seq5 are Loot, Soldier, Redandblack, Queen,
and Longdress.
The algorithm runtime reported in Table VI includes the
encoding/decoding of both geometry and attributes. GeS-TM
and V-PCC are fully implemented in C++. Our proposed
ME is implemented in MATLAB, while we still rely on
the C++ implementation GPCC for RAHT, quantization and
entropy coding. On average, the proposed scheme is slightly
slower than GeS-TM but more efficient than V-PCC. In our
scheme, the most time-consuming parts are the nearest-point
search in motion estimation and motion compensation. Though
our scheme is more complex than GeS-TM due to more
complicated motion estimation and compensation, it remains in
the same order of magnitude because it is also geometry-based
and 3D-native, and it avoids the computational inefficiencies
of 2D-to-3D conversion and highly complex 2D video coding.
VII.
CONCLUSION
We proposed a novel geometry-based motion estimation
scheme for dynamic solid point cloud attributes. The whole
coding scheme is implemented on top of the state-of-the-
art codec G-PCC. The coding results demonstrate that our
proposed method outperforms the widely used G-PCC, GeS-
TM, and V-PCC. While the proposed ME scheme success-
fully captures the dominant motion patterns in dynamic point
clouds, certain sequences exhibit complex, highly non-rigid
motion—such as hair dynamics, garment fluttering, and vis-
coelastic deformation of soft tissues. As translation motion
cannot accurately describe most of these motions, residual
energy remains high after motion compensation. Addressing
this problem is left for future work.


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
13
REFERENCES
[1]
Q. Jin, Y. Liu, P. Zhou, B. Han, S. Yarosh, and F. Qian, “Volumivive:
An authoring system for adding interactivity to volumetric video,” in
2023 IEEE Conf. on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces Abstracts
and Workshops (VRW), pp. 569–570, 2023.
[2]
S. Schwarz, M. Preda, V. Baroncini, M. Budagavi, P. Cesar, P. A.
Chou, R. A. Cohen, M. Krivoku´ca, S. Lasserre, Z. Li, J. Llach,
K. Mammou, R. Mekuria, O. Nakagami, E. Siahaan, A. Tabatabai,
A. M. Tourapis, and V. Zakharchenko, “Emerging MPEG standards
for point cloud compression,” IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected
Topics in Circuits and Systems, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 133–148, 2019.
[3]
D. G. Alexandre Zaghetto and A. T. (Sony), “Objective point cloud clas-
sification according to density distribution.” WG7, MPEG 3D Graphics
Coding and Haptics, ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 29/WG 7 m62063 Online -
January 2023.
[4]
D. Graziosi, O. Nakagami, S. Kuma, A. Zaghetto, T. Suzuki, and
A. Tabatabai, “An overview of ongoing point cloud compression stan-
dardization activities: video-based (V-PCC) and geometry-based (G-
PCC),” APSIPA Trans. on Signal and Information Proc., vol. 9, p. e13,
2020.
[5]
R. L. de Queiroz and P. A. Chou, “Compression of 3D point clouds
using a region-adaptive hierarchical transform,” IEEE Trans. on Image
Processing, vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 3947–3956, 2016.
[6]
S.
Lasserre
and
D.
Flynn,
“On
an
improvement
of
raht
to
exploit
attribute
correlation.”
input
document
m47378,
ISO/IEC
JTC1/SC29/WG11 MPEG, 2019.
[7]
E. Pavez, B. Girault, A. Ortega, and P. A. Chou, “Region adaptive
graph Fourier transform for 3D point clouds,” in 2020 IEEE Intl. Conf.
on Image Proc. (ICIP), pp. 2726–2730, 2020.
[8]
W. Wang, Y. Xu, K. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Peer upsampled transform
domain prediction for g-pcc,” in 2023 IEEE Intl. Conf. on Multimedia
and Expo (ICME), pp. 708–713, 2023.
[9]
S. N. Sridhara, E. Pavez, and A. Ortega, “Cylindrical coordinates for
lidar point cloud compression,” in 2021 IEEE Intl. Conf. on Image Proc.
(ICIP), pp. 3083–3087, 2021.
[10]
S. N. Sridhara, E. Pavez, A. Ortega, R. Watanabe, and K. Nonaka, “Point
cloud attribute compression via chroma subsampling,” in ICASSP 2022 -
2022 IEEE Intl. Conf. on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Proc. (ICASSP),
pp. 2579–2583, 2022.
[11]
G. Sandri, F. Thudor, M. Krivoku´ca, and B. Chupeau, “A motion-
compensated inter-frame attribute coding scheme for dynamic dense
point clouds,” in 2023 IEEE 25th Intl. Workshop on Multimedia Signal
Proc. (MMSP), pp. 1–6, 2023.
[12]
M. D. G. C. WG7 and Haptics, “Ges-tm v9: User manual of test model
v9 for geometry-based solid point cloud coding,” ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC
29/WG 7 N01102 Geneva, January 2025.
[13]
B. Vishwanath, K. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Advances in predictive raht
for geometric point cloud compression,” IEEE Trans. on Image Proc.,
vol. 34, pp. 2926–2938, 2025.
[14]
Y. Xu, W. Hu, S. Wang, X. Zhang, S. Wang, S. Ma, Z. Guo, and
W. Gao, “Predictive generalized graph Fourier transform for attribute
compression of dynamic point clouds,” IEEE Trans. on Circuits and
Systems for Video Technology, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1968–1982, 2021.
[15]
C. Santos, M. Gonc¸alves, G. Corrˆea, and M. Porto, “Block-based inter-
frame prediction for dynamic point cloud compression,” in 2021 IEEE
Intl. Conf. on Image Proc. (ICIP), pp. 3388–3392, 2021.
[16]
A. L. Souto, R. L. De Queiroz, and C. Dorea, “Motion-compensated
predictive raht for dynamic point clouds,” IEEE Trans. on Image Proc.,
vol. 32, pp. 2428–2437, 2023.
[17]
B. Vishwanath, Y. Xu, W. Wang, K. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “Temporal
filtering for region adaptive hierarchical transform in geometric point
cloud compression,” in 2023 IEEE Intl. Conf. on Visual Communica-
tions and Image Proc. (VCIP), pp. 1–5, 2023.
[18]
H. Hong, E. Pavez, A. Ortega, R. Watanabe, and K. Nonaka, “Motion
estimation and filtered prediction for dynamic point cloud attribute
compression,” in 2022 Picture Coding Symposium (PCS), pp. 139–143,
2022.
[19]
H. Hong, E. Pavez, A. Ortega, R. Watanabe, and K. Nonaka, “Frac-
tional motion estimation for point cloud compression,” in 2022 Data
Compression Conf. (DCC), pp. 369–378, 2022.
[20]
Y. Zhang, C. Zhang, R. Fan, S. Ma, Z. Chen, and C.-C. J. Kuo,
“Recent advances on hevc inter-frame coding: From optimization to
implementation and beyond,” IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems for
Video Technology, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 4321–4339, 2020.
[21]
A. L. Souto, R. L. de Queiroz, and C. Dorea, “A 3D motion vector
database for dynamic point clouds,” 2020.
[22]
“G-PCC
reference
software”.”
https://github.com/MPEGGroup/
mpeg-pcc-tmc13. Accessed on: May. 20, 2024.
[23]
C. Zhang, D. Florencio, and C. Loop, “Point cloud attribute compression
with graph transform,” in 2014 IEEE Intl. Conf. on Image Proc. (ICIP),
pp. 2066–2070, IEEE, 2014.
[24]
H. Malvar, “Adaptive run-length/Golomb-Rice encoding of quantized
generalized gaussian sources with unknown statistics,” in Data Com-
pression Conf. (DCC’06), pp. 23–32, 2006.
[25]
R. L. de Queiroz and P. A. Chou, “Motion-compensated compression of
dynamic voxelized point clouds,” IEEE Trans. on Image Proc., vol. 26,
no. 8, pp. 3886–3895, 2017.
[26]
C. Dorea and R. L. de Queiroz, “Block-based motion estimation
speedup for dynamic voxelized point clouds,” in 2018 25th IEEE Intl.
Conf. on Image Proc. (ICIP), pp. 2964–2968, 2018.
[27]
C. Dorea, E. M. Hung, and R. L. de Queiroz, “Local texture and
geometry descriptors for fast block-based motion estimation of dynamic
voxelized point clouds,” in 2019 IEEE Intl. Conf. on Image Proc. (ICIP),
pp. 3721–3725, 2019.
[28]
D. Thanou, P. A. Chou, and P. Frossard, “Graph-based compression
of dynamic 3D point cloud sequences,” IEEE Trans. on Image Proc.,
vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 1765–1778, 2016.
[29]
R. Mekuria, K. Blom, and P. Cesar, “Design, implementation, and
evaluation of a point cloud codec for tele-immersive video,” IEEE Trans.
on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 828–
842, 2017.
[30]
T. Fan, Y. Hu, R. Gong, and Y. Wang, “U-motion: Learned point cloud
video compression with u-structured temporal context generation,”
2024.
[31]
A. L. Souto and R. L. de Queiroz, “On predictive RAHT for dynamic
point cloud coding,” in 2020 IEEE Intl. Conf. on Image Proc. (ICIP),
pp. 2701–2705, 2020.
[32]
C. Zhang, D. Florˆencio, and P. A. Chou, “Graph signal processing-a
probabilistic framework,” Microsoft Res., Redmond, WA, USA, Tech.
Rep. MSR-TR-2015-31, 2015.
[33]
R. Schnabel and R. Klein, “Octree-based point-cloud compression.,”
PBG@ SIGGRAPH, vol. 3, no. 3, 2006.
[34]
O. Sorkine and M. Alexa, “As-rigid-as-possible surface modeling,”
in Proceedings of EUROGRAPHICS/ACM SIGGRAPH Symposium on
Geometry Processing, pp. 109–116, 2007.
[35]
M. Frank and P. Wolfe, “An algorithm for quadratic programming,”
Naval Research Logistics Quarterly, vol. 3, no. 1-2, pp. 95–110, 1956.
[36]
“V-PCC
reference
software”.”
https://github.com/MPEGGroup/
mpeg-pcc-tmc2. Accessed on: May. 20, 2024.
