Title: Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.29582v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 01:42:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 48

Markdown Content:
# Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search 

# Abhishek Shukla 1 Ankur Sinha 2 Faiz Hamid 11Department of Management Sciences, IIT Kanpur, India 

# abhiskl@iitk.ac.in, fhamid@iitk.ac.in 

> 2

# Krishnamurthy Tandon School of AI, IIM Ahmedabad, India 

# asinha@iima.ac.in 

Abstract 

Bilevel optimization has become an influential and widely adopted framework for addressing hi-erarchical optimization problems in machine learning, providing an effective approach to modeling the interaction between two levels of optimization, with applications such as hyperparameter tun-ing, meta-learning, adversarial training, and data poisoning. Neural Architecture Search (NAS), a subfield of hyperparameter optimization, is a prime example of a bilevel optimization problem, with architecture parameters optimized at the outer-level and network weights optimized at the inner level. This paper presents a structured overview of NAS through the lens of bilevel optimization. We categorize existing NAS approaches into two main classes: sampling-based methods, which search optimal architectures using different architecture samplers, and bilevel theory-based methods, which solve the architecture search problem using bilevel optimization principles. We further highlight our current research direction, wherein the bilevel NAS formulation is addressed through an aux-iliary mathematical programming framework. This framework enables the systematic integration of second-order information from the model’s training loss function and ensures the optimality of the model parameters while modifying architecture parameters. By simultaneously updating the ar-chitecture and model parameters along their respective optimal descent directions derived from the auxiliary mathematical program, these methods achieve more principled and theoretically consistent results. The same auxiliary program can also be used for simultaneous hyperparameter and model fine-tuning. A comparative analysis shows that bilevel theory-based approaches generally outperform sampling-based methods, both in accuracy and efficiency. The paper concludes by outlining future research opportunities, emphasizing the expanding role of bilevel optimization in driving advances in NAS. 

Keywords: Neural architecture search, Bilevel optimization, Mathematical programming. 

# 1 Introduction 

Optimization holds a pivotal role in machine learning and mathematical modeling, encompassing a wide spectrum of problem formulations. Broadly, optimization tasks can be categorized according to the number of decision-making levels involved, leading to single-level and bilevel (two level) formulations, each characterized by distinct structural properties and application domains. The single-level formulation assumes that all decision variables are optimized jointly in a single layer of decision-making. Thus, it has a single-level of optimization task. On the contrary, in many real-world situations, decision-making involves two individuals: a leader and a follower. The leader decides first, and the follower responds by choosing the best possible action based on the leader’s choice. The interaction between the leader and follower forms a Bilevel Optimization Problem (BOP), where the leader’s decision-making task is called the upper-level problem, and the follower’s response is modeled as the lower-level problem. A real-life example of a BOP can be observed in pricing and production strategies within a supply chain. In this hierarchical structure, the manufacturer (leader) determines the wholesale price of a product, anticipating how the retailer (follower) will respond when deciding the order quantity. Given the manufacturer’s price, the retailer selects the quantity that maximizes its own profit. The manufacturer, in turn, chooses the price that maximizes its profit while accounting for the retailer’s optimal reaction. This setup captures the essence of bilevel decision-making, where the leader’s strategy depends on the follower’s best response. Therefore, unlike single-level optimization, where all variables are optimized at one-level, BOP explicitly consists of two hierarchical levels of optimization tasks. Owing to the hierarchical formulation, bilevel 1

> arXiv:2606.29582v1 [cs.LG] 28 Jun 2026

Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

Figure 1: Representation power and overfitting in ANNs. programming provides a unifying framework that allows the representation of many practical optimization problems that cannot be represented in single-level; in fact, every single-level optimization problem can also be viewed as a special case of bilevel programming [1]. It is noteworthy, however, that the follower’s optimal decision may not always align with the leader’s interests, as seen in problems such as toll pricing and adversarial learning. Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) constitute a subset of machine learning models that are concep-tually influenced by the neural structure and functional characteristics of the human brain, i.e., they are computational models of biological neural networks. These networks process information by transmitting data through multiple layers of interconnected units, thereby emulating the signal propagation observed in biological neural systems. The trainable elements of an ANN, known as model parameters, primarily include the weights and biases associated with these connections. These parameters are iteratively ad-justed during training to minimize a predefined loss function, thereby enabling the network to learn from data through error-driven updates. In contrast, hyperparameters are configuration settings that must be specified prior to training, as they are not directly learned from the data. They can be broadly categorized into three types: architectural parameters (e.g., the number of layers and neurons per layer), optimization hyperparameters (such as learning rate and momentum), and regularization hyperparameters (including weight decay and dropout) [2]. The architecture of an ANN is primarily determined by factors such as the number of hidden layers, the number of neurons within each layer, the sequence of layers, and the choice of activation functions. These architectural design choices play a central role in shaping the network’s capacity to learn and represent complex, nonlinear relationships within the input data. Al-though increasing the network’s depth or width can enhance its expressive power and performance on training data, it also increases the risk of overfitting, a condition in which the model memorizes noise or spurious patterns in the training set, thereby impairing its ability to generalize to unseen data. This phenomenon is illustrated in Figure 1, which is obtained by training and evaluating neural network mod-2Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

Figure 2: Conceptual illustration of NAS. els on the synthetic dataset described in Appendix A. The figure visualizes how the decision boundaries evolve as the number of layers and neurons increases, highlighting the growing representational capacity of the network. As the architecture becomes more complex, the decision boundaries adapt more finely to the training data, improving training accuracy but also increasing the risk of overfitting and degraded generalization to unseen data. In the third configuration, small isolated regions (islands) emerge in the decision boundary to correctly classify individual training points, clearly illustrating how excessive model flexibility can sacrifice generalization for perfect training performance. Designing an effective neural network architecture is a critical step in developing high-performing deep learning models. Traditionally, this process has relied heavily on expert intuition, manual experimen-tation, and empirical trial-and-error. Neural Architecture Search (NAS), a sub-field of Hyperparameter Optimization (HPO) and Automated Machine Learning (AutoML), seeks to automate this design pro-cess. The central objective of NAS is to identify the optimal architecture from a vast and complex search space of possible configurations, tailored to a specific task and dataset. Figure 2 illustrates the conceptual framework of neural architecture search [3]. Formally, NAS is often formulated as a BOP, in which the upper-level seeks the optimal network architecture, while the lower-level focuses on training the corre-sponding model parameters to optimality. However, the NAS search space is typically high-dimensional and discrete, rendering the optimization process both computationally demanding and algorithmically challenging. Despite these complexities, NAS has demonstrated remarkable success in automating archi-tectural design, substantially reducing human intervention, and producing models that match or even outperform manually crafted architectures. Building on these insights, this paper presents a unified view of NAS from the standpoint of bilevel optimization, with a particular focus on differentiable approaches that have a potential to significantly advance the field. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the fundamental concepts of bilevel optimization, establishing the theoretical foundation for subsequent discussions. Section 3 reviews both sampling-based and bilevel-theoretic approaches to NAS, highlighting their evolution from traditional hyperparameter optimization techniques to modern bilevel techniques. Section 4 synthesizes findings from existing studies, providing a comparative overview of the reported performance of different NAS methodologies. Furthermore, Section 5 discusses the summary and emerging trends, highlighting the effectiveness of the auxiliary mathematical program-based approaches. Finally, Section 6 concludes the paper by summarizing key insights and outlining promising avenues for future research. 

# 2 Basics of Bilevel Optimization 

In this section, we formally discuss BOPs. For completeness, we first define a single-level optimization problem to distinguish it mathematically from a BOP. 

Definition 2.1. A single-level optimization problem is defined as min  

> x,y

F (x, y ) subject to G(x, y ) ≤ 0, H(x, y ) = 0 , (1) where x = ( x1, . . . , x n)⊤ ∈ Rn and y = ( y1, . . . , y m)⊤ ∈ Rm are the decision variables; F : Rn × Rm → R

is the objective function; G = ( G1, . . . , G p)⊤ : Rn × Rm → Rp defines p inequality constraints, i.e., 

Gi(x, y ) ≤ 0 for i = 1 , . . . , p ; and H = ( H1, . . . , H q )⊤ : Rn × Rm → Rq defines q equality constraints, i.e., 

Hj (x, y ) = 0 for j = 1 , . . . , q .3Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

Definition 2.2. A bilevel optimization problem is defined as “min”  

> x

F (x, ˆy) subject to 



ˆy ∈ argmin 

> y

{f (x, y ) | g(x, y ) ≤ 0, h (x, y ) = 0 } ,G(x, ˆy) ≤ 0, H (x, ˆy) = 0 ,

(2) where x = ( x1, . . . , x n)⊤ ∈ Rn and y = ( y1, . . . , y m)⊤ ∈ Rm are the upper-level and lower-level decision variables, respectively; F : Rn × Rm → R is the upper-level objective function; f : Rn × Rm → R is the lower-level objective function; G = ( G1, . . . , G p)⊤ : Rn × Rm → Rp and H = ( H1, . . . , H q )⊤ : Rn × Rm →

Rq define the p inequality and q equality constraints of the upper-level problem, i.e., Gi(x, ˆy) ≤ 0for i = 1 , . . . , p and Hj (x, ˆy) = 0 for j = 1 , . . . , q ; g = ( g1, . . . , g r )⊤ : Rn × Rm → Rr and h =(h1, . . . , h s)⊤ : Rn × Rm → Rs define the r inequality and s equality constraints of the lower-level problem, i.e., gk(x, y ) ≤ 0 for k = 1 , . . . , r and hℓ(x, y ) = 0 for ℓ = 1 , . . . , s .Table 1: Key mathematical concepts and notations used in the formulation of BOPs. 

Name and Notation Description 

Lower-level feasible region Ω : Rn ⇒ Rm

Ω( x) = {y : g(x, y ) ≤ 0, h (x, y ) = 0 }

Defines the set of feasible lower-level decisions for a given upper-level deci-sion and is a set-valued (multi-valued) mapping from Rn into the power set of Rm

Lower-level reaction set Ψ : Rn ⇒ Rm

Ψ( x) = 



ˆy : ˆ y ∈ argmin 

> y

{f (x, y ) : y ∈ Ω( x)}



Represents the set of optimal lower-level responses for a given upper-level decision and is a set-valued (multi-valued) mapping from Rn into the power set of Rm

Relaxed feasible set Φ = gph Ω Φ = {(x, y ) : G(x, y ) ≤ 0, H (x, y ) = 0 , g (x, y ) ≤ 0, h (x, y ) = 0 }

Describes the feasible region that jointly satisfies both upper- and lower-level constraints excluding the lower-level optimality constraint Inducible region 

I = gph Ψ 

I = {(x, ˆy) : ( x, ˆy) ∈ Φ, ˆy ∈ Ψ( x)}

Contains all pairs of upper-level decisions and associated lower-level optimal responses Choice function 

ψ : Rn → Rm

ψ(x) ∈ Ψ( x)Defines a single-valued mapping that selects one optimal lower-level re-sponse, representing a deterministic follower behavior Optimal value function 

φ : Rn → R

φ(x) = min  

> y∈Ω( x)

f (x, y )Outputs the minimum value of the lower-level objective function over the lower-level feasible set, given an upper-level decision Induced value function 

θ : Rn → R

θ(x) = min  

> ˆy∈Ψ( x)

F (x, ˆy)Associates each upper-level decision with the minimum value of the upper-level objective function over the follower’s optimal response set In Definition 2, the quotes in the upper-level objective indicate ambiguity arising when multiple opti-mal solutions exist at the lower-level for a given upper-level decision. In such cases, the leader’s outcome depends on which solution is selected by the follower—cooperative or adversarial—thereby requiring an explicit selection rule to fully define the problem. At its core, a BOP involves upper-level and lower-level decision variables, where the follower solves a parametric optimization problem while treating the leader’s decision as a parameter. Crucially, a solution is feasible for the upper-level problem if and only if it cor-responds to an optimal solution of the lower-level problem while satisfying the upper-level constraints. This nested structure distinguishes BOPs from standard single-level formulations. 4Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al.  

> (a) Single Lower-level Optimal Solution (b) Multiple Lower-level Optimal Solutions

Figure 3: Illustration of unique vs. multiple lower-level optimal solutions of a BOP. The BOP, as defined in (2), establishes a hierarchical framework involving two interlinked levels of optimization. Table 1 summarizes the key symbols and terms commonly employed in the theory of bilevel optimization as described in [4]. The reaction set Ψ( x), defined in Table 1, is a set-valued mapping that depends explicitly on x and is, in most practical cases, nonconvex and possibly disconnected. For the upper-level problem to remain feasible, the reaction set must be nonempty, i.e., Ψ( x)̸ = ∅. Moreover, Ψ( x)need not be unique. It may contain a single or multiple optimal responses for any given x, as illustrated in Figure 3. A given upper-level and lower-level decision pair ( x, ˆy) is therefore feasible to the leader only when x is associated with ˆ y that corresponds to an optimal solution of the lower-level problem, while satisfying the upper-level constraints too. A bilevel optimal solution thus represents a pair ( x∗, y ∗) in which both the leader’s decision and the follower’s optimal response are jointly optimal, reflecting the intrinsic coupling between the two levels. This interdependence is depicted in Figure 4, which highlights how variations in one level influence the feasibility and optimality of the other. Such hierarchical coupling substantially increases the analytical and computational complexity of bilevel optimization algorithms. The upper-level objective is no longer independent but is shaped by the outcome of an embedded lower-level optimization, which introduces several structural and algorithmic challenges, as summarized in Table 2. This bilevel structure is the characteristic of many practical scenarios. Some of them are given in Table 3. For instance, in HPO and NAS, model parameters are first optimized in response to a given hyperparameter configuration, and then the outer-level variables (hyperparameters or architecture pa-rameters) are tuned to improve generalization in an iterative manner. In adversarial learning, robustness is achieved by proactively accounting for the worst-case perturbations that an adversary might introduce. In inverse optimization, the leader seeks to estimate model parameters such that the resulting optimal decisions replicate observed behavior as closely as possible, effectively learning from data to uncover underlying decision-making rules. In network design and resource allocation, the leader optimizes infras-tructural variables while accounting for the system-optimal response of users, such as traffic routing. In electricity market bidding, a firm maximizes its revenue by anticipating how the market operator will allocate resources to minimize overall cost. In security resource allocation, the defender allocates available resources to minimize potential damage, considering the most damaging response of a rational attacker. To illustrate how bilevel problems are modeled and solved in practice, we present a representative case study in Appendix B. This case study arises in the transportation domain and focuses on a toll-setting problem [5, 6, 7]. 

# 2.1 Modeling Frameworks for Bilevel Optimization Problems 

Depending on how the leader anticipates the follower’s behavior and the inherent nature of their relation-ship in situations where there are multiple lower-level optimal solutions for a given upper-level decision, different modeling paradigms can be adopted. At a high level, the interaction between the leader and follower can be viewed through two fundamental lenses: cooperation or conflict. These perspectives then give rise to the well-known mathematical interpretations of the BOP, commonly categorized as the 5Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

Figure 4: Interdependence between the upper- and lower-level problems. optimistic and pessimistic formulations. 

2.1.1 Optimistic and Pessimistic Formulations 

The distinction between cooperation and conflict matters only when the follower has multiple optimal responses to the leader’s decision. If the follower’s best response is unique, their behavior is entirely predictable. Regardless of whether the leader and follower act cooperatively or competitively, the out-come remains the same. However, when the follower is indifferent among several equally good options, uncertainty arises about which one they will pick. The optimistic and pessimistic formulations resolve this ambiguity by defining how the follower’s choice should be interpreted. 

The Optimistic Formulation (Modeling Cooperation): The optimistic formulation is used when the leader assumes a cooperative relationship. It posits that if the follower has multiple optimal solutions, they will benevolently choose the one that is most favorable for the leader. This is often called the best-case scenario for the leader. The lower-level optimal response in the optimistic setting (choice function ψo(x)) is defined in Equation (3), and the optimistic bilevel problem is modeled in Formulation (4). 

ψo(x) = argmin 

> ˆy∈Ψ( x)

F (x, ˆy) (3) min  

> x

F (x, ˆyo) subject to 



ˆyo = ψo(x),G(x, ˆyo) ≤ 0, H (x, ˆyo) = 0 (4) 

Example: Consider a government (leader) that wants to subsidize green energy production to min-imize carbon emissions. It offers a subsidy rate to a power company (follower), whose objective is to maximize its profit. Suppose for a given subsidy rate, the company can achieve the same maximum profit by either building a large solar farm or a slightly smaller solar farm and a small natural gas plant. The optimistic assumption is that the cooperative, environmentally-conscious company will choose to build the large solar farm, as this option best aligns with the government’s goal of minimizing emissions. 

The Pessimistic Formulation (Modeling Conflict): The pessimistic formulation is applied when the leader assumes a conflicting relationship. It represents a more cautious, defensive stance, where 6Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. Table 2: Key properties of BOPs. 

Property Description 

Hierarchical and nested The upper-level and lower-level problems are interlinked, forming a nested decision structure Non-convexity The feasible region is typically non-convex and may even be discon-nected, complicating solution methods Computational complex-ity BOPs are strongly NP-hard, making them computationally intractable in general cases Feasibility A solution is feasible only if it simultaneously satisfies the constraints of both levels, while satisfying lower-level optimality Multiple lower-level op-tima The existence of several follower optima adds ambiguity and complexity to the problem Modes of interaction Optimistic (Cooperative), where the follower’s choice is favorable to the leader; Pessimistic (Conflicting), where the follower’s choice is unfavor-able to the leader Non-differentiability Arises from the implicit dependence of upper-level on the follower’s op-timal response Reformulation needs Often necessitates reformulation using the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions, duality, or various mappings to improve tractability Sensitivity Apart from objectives and constraints, the stability and convergence of algorithms are affected by the sensitivity of the lower-level solution mapping the leader anticipates that the follower will choose the option that is least favorable for the leader from their set of optimal solutions. This is the worst-case scenario, and the leader seeks a decision that is robust against this adversarial response. The lower-level optimal response in the pessimistic setting (choice function ψp(x)) is defined in Equation (5), and the pessimistic bilevel problem is modeled in Formulation (6). 

ψp(x) = argmax 

> ˆy∈Ψ( x)

F (x, ˆy) (5) min  

> x

F (x, ˆyp) subject to 



ˆyp = ψp(x),G(x, ˆyp) ≤ 0, H (x, ˆyp) = 0 (6) 

Example: Reconsider the same government (leader) and power company (follower) setup. For a given subsidy rate, suppose the company again finds two profit-maximizing options: building a large solar farm or a smaller solar farm combined with a small natural gas plant. Under the pessimistic assumption, the government does not presume cooperation but instead prepares for the less desirable outcome, as the company may opt for a mixed solar-gas configuration, which yields higher emissions. Notably, the company’s choice is not necessarily adversarial; however, the pessimistic government designs its subsidy policy to remain effective even under such a cautious, worst-case interpretation of the company’s behavior. A nuanced discussion of bilevel problem formulations is presented in [19], where the authors distinguish between two modeling perspectives, namely, the real and standard bilevel formulations (discussed in Appendix C). These formulations are applicable to both optimistic and pessimistic settings. 

2.1.2 High-point Formulation 

A high-point relaxation is a single-level relaxation of the BOP stated as min  

> x,y

F (x, y ) subject to 

(

g(x, y ) ≤ 0, h (x, y ) = 0 ,G(x, y ) ≤ 0, H (x, y ) = 0 (7) 7Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. Table 3: Applications of bilevel optimization. 

Application Description 

Hyperparameter optimization min  

> λ

Lv (λ, ˆW )s.t. ˆW ∈ argmin 

> W

Lt(λ, W )Tune hyperparameters λ to minimize validation loss, assuming model weights ˆW are trained optimally [8, 9, 10] Adversarial learning min  

> θ

Ex[ℓ(θ, x + ˆδ)] s.t. ˆδ ∈ argmax 

> ∥δ∥≤ ϵ

ℓ(θ, x + δ)Learn robust model parameters θ by accounting for worst-case adversarial perturbations ˆδ [11] Inverse optimization min  

> θ

∥ˆy − ˜y∥2

s.t. ˆ y ∈ argmin 

> y

f (θ, y )Optimize the model parameters θ such that the model-generated decision ˆ y closely matches the observed decision ˜ y [12, 13] Network design & resource allocation min  

> x

C(x, ˆy)s.t. ˆ y ∈ argmin 

> y

T (x, y )Optimize resource allocations x to minimize cost, considering optimal traffic routing ˆ y for a given x [14] Electricity market bidding max  

> b

R(b, ˆy)s.t. ˆ y ∈ argmin 

> y

{P 

> i

biyi : power balance and capacity constraints }

Determine optimal bidding prices b to maximize revenue, anticipating the Independent System Operator’s (ISO) cost-minimizing generation dispatch ˆ y [15] Security resource allocation (defender–attacker) min  

> x∈X

R(x, ˆy)s.t. ˆ y ∈ argmax 

> y∈Y (x)

U (x, y )Defender allocates resources x to minimize damage from an optimal attacker response ˆ y [16, 17, 18] The optimal value of the hight-point relaxation (7) provides a valid lower bound on the optimal value of the original BOP (2) as we have removed the lower-level optimality requirement that was acting as a constraint. It is noteworthy that the lower-level constraints are still maintained. 

2.1.3 Illustrative Example 

Consider the BOP (8), which serves to illustrate the distinctions among the optimistic, pessimistic, and high-point formulations. “min”  

> x

F (x, ˆy) = x2 + ˆ y2 + ˆ y − x + 12 (8) subject to 

−1 ≤ x ≤ 1,

−x + ˆ y ≤ 1,x − ˆy ≤ 1,

ˆy ∈ argmin 

> y

f (x, y ) = ( y − x)4 − (y − x)2 x2 + y2 ≤ 1, x + y ≤ 1

8Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

Figure 5: Geometric illustration of the considered BOP. This problem exhibits a typical structural asymmetry of bilevel formulations. Although the upper- and lower-level objectives and constraints appear simple, their convexity properties differ. In particular, 

Upper-level Problem: The objective function is convex in ( x, ˆy), but the (bilevel) feasible region is non-convex because of the embedded lower-level optimality condition 

Lower-level Problem: The constraints are convex, yet the objective is non-convex, which leads to multiple local/global optima. This mixture of convex and non-convex components illustrates why BOPs remain computationally chal-lenging, even when each level alone may look relatively simple. The solutions of the optimistic, pessimistic and high-point formulation of the problem are given in Table 4. Further details are provided in the Ap-pendix D. Let us solve the high-point formulation of the considered BOP. In the high-point relaxation, the lower-level variable y is allowed to be any value satisfying the upper-and lower-level constraints, regardless of lower-level optimality. The resulting problem is min  

> x,y

x2 + y2 + y − x + 12 ,

s.t. − 1 ≤ x ≤ 1,

− x + y ≤ 1,x − y ≤ 1,x2 + y2 ≤ 1,x + y ≤ 1Rewriting the objective 

F (x, y ) =  x − 12

2 +  y + 12

2

The above function is minimized at ( x∗, y ∗) = ( 12 , − 12 ), yielding an optimal value of F (x∗, y ∗) = 0, which is a lower bound to the bilevel optimal solution (optimistic/pessimistic). Figure 5 illustrates the BOP geometrically. The contours correspond to the upper level objective and the shaded area represents the relaxed bilevel feasible region, where both upper- and lower-level constraints are satisfied, but the lower-level optimality condition is relaxed. The segments of the lines ˆ y = x + 1√2 and ˆ y = x − 1√2

within this region form the reaction set, indicating all possible lower-level optimal responses to a given upper-level decision. Medium blue circles depict contours of the upper-level objective. Three solutions 9Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. Table 4: Optimal solutions and objective values for different formulations. 

Formulation Type Solution and Objective Values 

Optimistic (x∗, y ∗) = 

 12√2 , − 12√2



F ∗ = F (x∗, y ∗) = 34 − 1√2

f ∗ = f (x∗, y ∗) = 



− 1√2

4

−



− 1√2

2

= 14 − 12 = − 14

Pessimistic (x∗, y ∗) = 



− 12√2 , 12√2



F ∗ = F (x∗, y ∗) = 34 + 1√2

f ∗ = f (x∗, y ∗) = 

 1√2

4

−

 1√2

2

= 14 − 12 = − 14

High-Point (x∗, y ∗) =   12 , − 12



F ∗ = F (x∗, y ∗) = 0 

f ∗ = f (x∗, y ∗) = ( −1) 4 − (−1) 2 = 1 − 1 = 0 are highlighted: the optimistic solution (blue), where the lower-level player acts in favor of the upper-level; the pessimistic solution (red), representing the worst-case lower-level response; and the high-point solution (green), corresponding to the single-level relaxation of the BOP. This example vividly illustrates how differing assumptions regarding the follower’s behavior (opti-mistic, pessimistic, or based on a relaxed high-point formulation) can lead to substantially different opti-mal solutions. These distinctions are not merely theoretical but arise naturally across various application domains. Some of them have already been discussed earlier. 

# 2.2 Solution Methods for Bilevel Optimization Problems 

Originating in the early 1970s, bilevel optimization has grown into a significant research domain with a robust theoretical foundation and diverse algorithmic advancements [4, 41, 42]. Various techniques have been developed to tackle the hierarchical nature of these problems. Among them, reformulations using the KKT conditions are prominent for transforming the lower-level problem into a set of constraints for the upper-level. Gradient-based strategies offer an alternative, leveraging sensitivity analysis to iteratively optimize the problem. Trust-region methods, known for their robustness, create a local approximation of the bilevel problem using an auxiliary problem. Penalty-based formulations introduce regularization terms that penalize constraint violations, simplifying problem structures. Approximation of reaction set mappings, or optimal value functions for bilevel problems has been a popular technique to solve these problems. Furthermore, the rise of sampling-based approaches has led to nested approximation techniques and hybrid methods that combine surrogate modeling or Bayesian optimization to mitigate computational complexity. A summary of bilevel optimization methods is given in the Table 5 for reference. The present study extends this line of research by employing a bilevel optimization perspective to analyze the structure underlying continuous hyperparameter tuning and architecture search tasks. The next section on NAS demonstrates how bilevel optimization principles are applied in practice. In partic-ular, the subsection on bilevel theory-based NAS methods explores specific solution strategies designed to address the bilevel nature of the problem. 

# 3 Neural Architecture Search 

To gain a clearer understanding of how neural networks are designed and optimized, it is important to distinguish between model parameters and hyperparameters, as both govern different aspects of the learning process. Table 6 provides a concise comparison between these two categories, highlighting their respective roles and implications in network training and performance. As explained earlier, NAS is an automated approach for discovering optimal neural network architec-tures tailored to specific tasks and datasets. It reduces the need for expert intervention by exploring a predefined search space using methods such as Reinforcement Learning (RL), evolutionary algorithms, gradient-based optimization, etc. The process involves defining the search space, selecting an NAS strat-10 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. Table 5: Solution methods for BOPs. 

Name and Category Description and References 

KKT-based Methods Utilize KKT conditions to reformulate and solve BOPs efficiently [20, 21, 22] Gradient Descent Methods Apply gradient-based optimization techniques for solving BOPs in differentiable settings [23, 24] Trust Region Methods Employ trust-region frameworks to enhance stability and conver-gence when solving BOPs [25, 26, 27] Penalty Methods Introduce penalty terms for constraint violations, enabling ap-proximate solutions to BOPs [28, 29, 2, 30] Approximation of Mappings Employ various approaches to approximate reaction set mappings, or optimal value functions, thereby reducing the cost of repeated nested optimization [2, 31] Hypergradient-based Methods Leverage hypergradients via implicit or automatic differentiation to optimize upper-level variables by accounting for the sensitivity of lower-level optimal solutions [9, 32] Sampling-based Nested Methods Use sampling to approximate nested structures in BOPs, reducing direct computational complexity [33, 34, 35, 36] Sampling-based Hybrid Methods Hybridize sampling with other methods (e.g., surrogate models, Bayesian inference) to balance accuracy and computational cost [37, 31, 38, 39, 40] egy, sampling and evaluating architectures, and iteratively refining selections based on performance met-rics like validation accuracy and model complexity. 

# 3.1 Bilevel Structure in NAS 

We consider the following bilevel NAS formulation (Formulation (9)) from [32], which is widely adopted in practice. min  

> A

Lv (A, ˆW )s.t. ˆW = argmin  

> W∈W

Lt(A, W )

A ∈ A

(9) In practical machine learning settings, a single model is typically instantiated for a given architecture 

A and trained to optimality, yielding an optimal model ˆW (A). Consequently, for all practical purposes, a unique global lower-level optimal solution is often assumed. However, from a theoretical perspective, multiple lower-level optimal solutions may exist for the same architecture, i.e., multiple optimal models can correspond to a given upper-level value A. This may occur because different initializations or choices of other hyperparameters (e.g., random seed, learning rate, weight decay, and dropout) can lead to distinct converged solutions with identical training performance. When multiple lower-level optimal solutions exist, an optimistic stance is implicitly adopted. Specifically, if multiple weight configurations attain the same optimal training loss, the lower-level optimizer is assumed to select the model that minimizes the upper-level objective, i.e., the one with the smallest validation loss. Therefore, Formulation (10) from [43] provides a more general representation of the bilevel NAS problem, as it correctly reflects that ˆW denotes an optimistic selection from the set of all optimal models corresponding to a given architecture 11 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. Table 6: Comparison between Model Parameters and Hyperparameters 

Model Parameters Hyperparameters 

Weights and biases in ANNs, filters in CNNs, attention and feedforward weights in Transformers, hidden state weights in RNNs/LSTMs/GRUs, etc. Number of layers and neurons, learning rate, regularization parameters, kernel size, number of filters (CNNs), dropout rate, batch size, etc. Learned from training data via backpropagation and gradient descent Set by experts or found via hyperparameter tuning techniques (e.g., grid search, random search, Bayesian optimization, Evolutionary search, etc.) Updated during training to minimize loss function Remain fixed during training but significantly affect the training dynamics and final performance Determine how the model fits the data Define the model’s structure and learning process or hyperparameter configuration. min  

> A

Lv (A, ˆW )s.t. ˆW ∈ argmin  

> W∈W

Lt(A, W )

A ∈ A

(10) Referring to the two NAS formulations discussed above, in the NAS/HPO setting, both notations (= and ∈) are technically valid, as adopted in [32] and [43], respectively. In practice, since only one model is typically considered for a given architecture or hyperparameter configuration, the reaction set (i.e., the set of optimal models corresponding to that architecture or configuration) is effectively treated as a singleton, which justifies the use of the equality notation (=). It is important to emphasize that this bilevel formulation is not merely a modeling convenience but is essential for the integrity and reliability of the NAS process. If architectures were evaluated using suboptimal or partially trained weights, the search could be significantly misled, favoring architectures that appear promising during training but fail to generalize. This highlights the deep interdependence be-tween architectural design and weight optimization: an architecture’s potential can only be meaningfully assessed when its weights have been sufficiently optimized. Unlike single-level approaches that collapse both training and validation into a unified optimization of training loss, bilevel methods explicitly account for generalization by optimizing the validation loss at the upper-level. Such single-level approaches are particularly prone to overfitting, often yielding architectures that perform well on the training distribu-tion but poorly on unseen data. In contrast, bilevel optimization ensures that each candidate architecture is evaluated fairly and robustly, with its weights tuned specifically to its structure. Ultimately, the goal is not merely to minimize training error but to maximize the generalization capability of the discovered architectures. A general assumption in NAS is that, for any given architecture parameter A, the lower-level problem admits at least one optimal solution ˆW . This assumption ensures that the bilevel problem has a well-defined, nonempty feasible region. The bilevel framework is particularly insightful in this regard, as it highlights two critical aspects: (1) the architecture space A directly shapes the lower-level optimization problem, and (2) only the optimal lower-level solutions, i.e., weight configurations that minimize the training loss, contribute to the upper-level objective defined by the validation loss. Consequently, the success of NAS fundamentally depends on the interaction between architecture selection and weight optimization, as illustrated in Figure 7. Notably, the lower-level problem is, in general, highly non-convex with respect to the lower-level variables and therefore constitutes a parametric non-convex optimization problem. However, for illustrative purposes, we assume the lower-level problem to be convex. To build intuition for how bilevel optimization operates in NAS, we examine the loss landscape shown in Figure 6. The shaded surface depicts the overall loss function L(A, W ), defined jointly over the architecture parameters A and the model weights W . Each point on this surface corresponds to a particular pair ( A, W ). If we fix an architecture A0, the orange curve indicates how the training loss varies 12 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

Figure 6: Upper- and lower-level optimization in NAS. 

Figure 7: Interplay between architecture selection and weight optimization. as the weights change. The orange triangle marks the optimal weights for this architecture, denoted by ˆW (A0) = argmin 

> W

Lt(A0, W ). The corresponding training loss is then Lt(A0, ˆW ) = L(A0, ˆW ; ST ), where 

ST denotes the training dataset. Repeating this process for all architectures yields the dark blue curve, which represents the optimized training loss Lt(A, ˆW ) after minimizing over the weights. The upper-level optimization is performed using the validation dataset SV . The green curve in the figure represents the validation loss Lv (A, ˆW ) = L(A, ˆW ; SV ), which guides the search toward the most promising architecture. The final solution is indicated by the green square, corresponding to the best architecture–weights pair (A∗, W ∗), where A∗ = argmin 

> A

Lv (A, ˆW ). This marks the outcome of the bilevel optimization process. 

# 3.2 A Review of NAS 

NAS has rapidly evolved since the seminal work of Zoph and Le (2017) [44], which first demonstrated that automated search could match, and in some cases surpass, manually designed networks. Their formulation cast architecture search as an RL problem, where a controller network sampled candidate architectures and updated its policy using performance-driven feedback to enable more informed architecture sampling in subsequent iterations. This early paradigm, exemplified by NASNet [45] and later ENAS [46], firmly established NAS as a promising alternative to manual architectural engineering. Although Zoph and Le ignited the field, their work built upon earlier efforts that explored architecture optimization in more restrictive forms. Approaches such as RL-based architecture search [47], early evolutionary pipelines [48], and Sequential Model-based Optimization (SMBO) driven modular frameworks like DeepArchitect [49] provided important precursors to modern NAS ideas. These foundations highlighted the need for automated design but lacked the scalability and generality that later methods achieved. Shortly after the rise of RL-based NAS, Evolutionary Computation (EC) emerged as another ma-jor search strategy. Methods such as Regularized Evolution [50] explored populations of architectures through mutation and selection, offering a simple yet surprisingly effective alternative to RL-based con-trollers. These non-differentiable approaches, however, were computationally expensive, motivating the community to seek more efficient formulations. A major turning point arrived with the introduction of differentiable NAS. DARTS [32] proposed a continuous relaxation of the architecture space, enabling efficient gradient-based optimization of architectural parameters. Its influence was profound: follow-up methods such as PC-DARTS [51], ProxylessNAS [52], and FBNet [53] improved scalability, addressed memory constraints, and introduced hardware-awareness for deployment on target mobile devices. The influence of DARTS has inspired a wide array of improved variants addressing stability, generalization, and performance issues, including [54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69, 70]. This differentiable paradigm subsequently expanded to transformers through AutoFormer [71], and to platform-specific architectures such as MnasNet [72], which performs latency-aware NAS on mobile de-vices, and EfficientNet [73], which uses multi-objective NAS to obtain a FLOPs-efficient baseline before 13 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. compound scaling. As NAS grew in popularity, the community recognized that reproducibility and fair comparison re-quired standardized, well-defined search spaces. This led to the introduction of the NAS-Bench family, beginning with NAS-Bench-101 [74], followed by NAS-Bench-201 [75], NAS-Bench-301 [76], NAS-Bench-NLP [77], and NAS-Bench-Graph [78]. These benchmarks provided fixed, exhaustively evaluated or surrogate-modeled search spaces, enabling rigorous evaluation without the confounding effects of noisy training pipelines. By clearly decoupling how architectures are searched (the NAS method) from where they are searched (the search space), these benchmarks played a pivotal role in stabilizing empirical re-sults and making NAS research more accessible. Parallel to the emergence of benchmarks, flexible and task-adaptive search spaces grew in importance. Once-for-All networks [79] introduced elastic supernets that encode a vast collection of subnetworks, enabling fast specialization through weight sharing. In the graph domain, GraphNAS [80] proposed a method for generating graph neural architectures, while NAS-Bench-Graph [78] provided a structured search space for evaluating them. Furthermore, recent efforts [81, 82] have focused on automatically generating search spaces themselves, reducing reliance on hand-crafted motif design and expanding NAS to increasingly diverse domains. A significant development in recent years has been the emergence of zero-cost proxies, such as SynFlow [83], TE-NAS [84], and NASWOT [85], which estimate model quality using gradient-based or analytic signals computed at initialization. These methods dramatically reduce search costs and have redefined the efficiency frontier of NAS. In parallel, the field has moved beyond small convolutional cells to embrace large-scale language models [86], multimodal models [87], and resource-efficient architectures [88]. This shift has motivated new paradigms such as LLM-guided NAS [89, 90], hybrid search strategies [91, 92], and scalable supernet training [93, 94] tailored for modern deep learning workloads. Across this evolutionary trajectory, four broad families of NAS methods have crystallized: RL [44], EC [95], Bayesian optimization [96], and gradient-based approaches [97]. These are complemented by one-shot and supernet-based methods [98], graph-based strategies [99], hierarchical formulations [100], and more recent zero-cost and hybrid approaches. In contrast, the search spaces explored by these methods have diversified from early cell-based designs [101], such as the DARTS Search Space (DSS) [32], to large-scale benchmarks and domain-specific collections in vision, language, and graph learning. Building on these richer search spaces and refined algorithms, NAS-designed architectures have consistently shown competitive or superior performance across diverse domains, including medical imaging [102, 103, 104], natural language processing [105], machine translation [106], smart city applications [107], and tasks like image classification, object detection [108], and semantic segmentation [100]. These advancements have democratized the network design process, reducing reliance on expert intervention and paving the way for broader accessibility in deep learning research [109]. Overall, the evolution of NAS reflects a shift from costly black-box exploration to principled optimiza-tion, standardized evaluation, and scalable, domain-aware search space design. With the foundational understanding established, we now turn our attention to two primary categories of neural architecture search methods: sampling-based approaches and bilevel theory-based approaches. This division reflects the conceptual framework adopted in this paper, wherein we organize the diverse NAS literature along these two axes. Each offers distinct strategies and theoretical underpinnings that have shaped the evolu-tion of NAS. 

# 3.3 Sampling-based NAS Methods 

Sampling-based NAS methods explore the architecture search space by evaluating multiple candidate architectures through heuristic or probabilistic mechanisms. They are generally simpler to implement and often serve as baselines for more advanced techniques. By balancing exploration and exploitation, these methods can be effective, though they typically require a large number of architecture evaluations, making them computationally expensive. Importantly, several approaches in this category address the bilevel NAS problem by approximating the joint optimization of architecture parameters and model weights through carefully designed sampling procedures. The flexibility of the method allows to consider both discrete and continuous hyperparameters. Some of the prominent examples of this category are discussed next. 

3.3.1 Grid Search-based NAS 

The Grid Sampler, commonly referred to as grid search, represents one of the most fundamental and deterministic strategies in hyperparameter optimization as discussed in [110, 111, 112, 113]. Within the context of NAS, it functions by exhaustively evaluating all possible combinations of architectural and 14 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

Figure 8: Multilayer perceptron architecture search using grid search. 

Figure 9: Multilayer perceptron architecture search using random search. training-related hyperparameters, defined over a finite and discretized search space. This systematic exploration ensures that each configuration within the predefined grid is assessed, thereby offering a comprehensive approach to identifying potentially optimal neural architectures. Despite its conceptual simplicity and thoroughness, grid search becomes increasingly impractical as the dimensionality of the search space grows. NAS often involves high-dimensional and complex design spaces, incorporating choices such as layer types, connection schemes, kernel sizes, activation functions, and regularization strategies. In such cases, the exhaustive nature of grid search incurs a substantial computational burden, rendering it inefficient and often infeasible for large-scale or time-sensitive applications. Nevertheless, due to its deterministic behavior and ease of implementation, grid search remains a valuable baseline method, particularly in preliminary experiments or when exploring well-constrained architectural subsets. Figure 8 provides an illustrative example of the grid search methodology as applied within the NAS framework. 

3.3.2 Random Search-based NAS 

The Random Sampler, commonly referred to as random search, is one of the most fundamental and widely applicable strategies in NAS. It is particularly advantageous when the structure of the search space is unknown or difficult to model. In contrast to grid search, which systematically evaluates config-urations drawn from a predefined grid, random search selects architecture configurations independently according to specified probability distributions, as discussed in [114, 115]. This approach offers several practical advantages: it is simple to implement, inherently parallelizable, and robust to incomplete or redundant trials. Under a fixed computational budget, it often matches or even surpasses structured search methods, as model performance is typically sensitive to only a small subset of hyperparameters (low effective dimensionality). Consequently, grid search tends to waste evaluations on uninformative combinations, whereas random sampling distributes trials more effectively across influential regions of the hyperparameter space, rather than being constrained to a few discrete levels as in a grid, thereby achieving broader and more representative coverage [114]. Its ability to explore the architectural land-scape in an unbiased and flexible manner makes it a strong baseline and a valuable tool for initializing more sophisticated search algorithms. Figure 9 visually demonstrates the mechanism of random search within the NAS framework. 

3.3.3 Bayesian Optimization-based NAS 

Bayesian optimization introduces a more strategic and data-efficient alternative to conventional search methods such as grid and random search. This class of methods leverages probabilistic surrogate models to approximate the objective function, thereby guiding the search process towards promising regions of the architecture space as discussed in [116, 117, 118]. In the context of NAS, such surrogate models, commonly instantiated via Gaussian Processes or Tree-structured Parzen Estimators (TPE), enable the efficient 15 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

Figure 10: Bayesian optimization-based sampler in an NAS setting. exploration of complex, high-dimensional design spaces. The TPE, in particular, is a sophisticated variant of Bayesian optimization widely adopted for hyperparameter and architecture optimization tasks. Rather than evaluating configurations blindly or exhaustively, TPE constructs a probabilistic model that estimates the likelihood of achieving high performance for different architectural configurations. This model-driven approach allows TPE to balance the trade-off between exploration (searching new regions) and exploitation (refining known good regions) using an acquisition function that strategically selects the next candidates to evaluate. Compared to brute-force strategies like grid search and even the more flexible random search, TPE offers significantly improved efficiency by prioritizing evaluations that are statistically more likely to yield favorable outcomes. This targeted strategy makes Bayesian optimization, and TPE in particular, highly suitable for NAS problems, where evaluations are costly and the search space is vast and sparsely populated. Figure 10 illustrates the functioning of a Bayesian optimization-based sampler within the NAS framework. 

3.3.4 Evolutionary Computation-based NAS 

EC has emerged as a powerful approach to address the bilevel optimization challenges in NAS. At the upper-level, EC methods evolve a population of candidate architectures, while at the lower-level, each architecture is trained to obtain a performance estimate that serves as fitness. The iterative evolutionary cycle allows effective exploration of complex, non-convex, and discrete search spaces without relying on gradient information. Inspired by biological evolution, EC methods apply operators such as mutation and crossover to gradually refine architectures. For a high-level view of the evolutionary sampling process, please refer to Figure 11. Popular approaches include genetic algorithms and differential evolution, both of which have demonstrated success in discovering competitive architectures within large and irregular search spaces. A key advantage of EC lies in its flexibility to incorporate approximate evaluation strategies. Given the high computational cost of fully training each architecture, surrogate models are often employed to predict performance, or early generations may rely on partial training and low-fidelity evaluation. More accurate assessments are then reserved for later stages of evolution. Co-evolutionary strategies extend this paradigm by jointly evolving architectures and other hyperparameters, thereby capturing their mutual dependencies. Some of EC-based works are [119, 120, 121, 122]. Furthermore, EC is naturally well-suited for multi-objective optimization, making it possible to balance competing criteria such as 16 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

Figure 11: EC based samplers for NAS. accuracy, latency, and model size. Several studies have explored multi-objective evolutionary approaches to neural architecture search (MOE-NAS), including [123, 124, 125, 126, 127]. These methods extend standard evolutionary NAS frameworks by simultaneously optimizing multiple conflicting objectives, such as accuracy, computational cost, and model complexity, thereby producing a set of Pareto-optimal architectures. 

3.3.5 Reinforcement Learning-based NAS 

RL offers a powerful framework for neural architecture search by enabling an intelligent agent, typically implemented as a controller neural network, to learn a policy for sampling high-performing architectures through trial and feedback. In this setup, the controller (often an RNN or Transformer) generates candidate architectures sequentially, treating the process as a Markov Decision Process (MDP), where each architectural decision corresponds to an action within a discrete action space. 

Figure 12: RL based sampler for NAS. To address the NAS problem defined by Formulation (9), an architecture sampler based on an RNN controller is employed to handle the upper-level task. At each iteration, the controller samples an ar-chitecture A with probability Pθc (A), and this architecture is instantiated and trained on the training dataset to solve the lower-level problem using standard gradient-based methods. The performance of the resulting model, typically evaluated on a held-out validation set, serves as a reward signal R(A) for the controller. The controller parameters θc are updated using policy gradient techniques to maximize the expected reward, thereby encouraging the generation of architectures that yield superior validation performance. Over successive iterations, the controller refines its sampling distribution, progressively favoring design choices that contribute to higher model accuracy. This adaptive exploration-exploitation mechanism enables RL-based NAS to effectively navigate vast architecture spaces and discover compet-itive network structures with minimal manual intervention. Figure 12 provides a high-level overview of the RL process applied to NAS [44]. Some other works in RL-based NAS are [128, 129, 130, 80]. 17 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

# 3.4 Bilevel Theory-based NAS Methods 

Bilevel theory-based NAS methods formulate NAS as a nested optimization problem, where architecture parameters serve as upper-level variables and model parameters as lower-level variables. The optimiza-tion of architecture parameters is guided by the performance of the trained model on a validation set, while the model parameters are optimized using the training data. These methods leverage bilevel opti-mization theory to provide a mathematical framework for solving the bilevel NAS problem, ensuring a theoretically grounded approach to jointly optimizing both sets of parameters. Bilevel NAS methods are particularly appealing for their theoretical rigor and enable efficient gradient-based optimization, though they often require careful handling of optimization dynamics and approximations. Most of these methods show benefit on continuous hyperparameters but can also be extended to discrete hyperparameters by doing a continuous relaxation. There is a tremendous potential of research in the context of discrete hyperparameters. Some of the influential methods in this category are discussed below. 

3.4.1 KKT Reformulation-based NAS 

These methods address the bilevel nature of NAS by reformulating it as a single-level optimization problem. Inspired by the approach in [131], this is achieved by replacing the lower-level problem with its corresponding KKT optimality conditions. 1 Consider the following tractable standard optimistic bilevel formulation of the NAS problem. min  

> A, ˆW

Lv (A, ˆW )subject to: ˆW ∈ argmin  

> W∈W

Lt(A, W ),A ∈ A

(11) This formulation is equivalent to the real optimistic formulation provided that the infimum of the val-idation loss over the reaction set of optimal models is attained (i.e., the minimum is achieved). Assuming the lower-level problem is unconstrained and sufficiently regular (e.g., Lt is continuously differentiable), the first-order optimality condition is 

∇W Lt(A, ˆW ) = 0 ,

which can be used to replace the lower-level problem, yielding the following single-level constrained optimization problem min  

> A, ˆW

Lv (A, ˆW ) subject to ∇W Lt(A, ˆW ) = 0 , A ∈ A

Solving this directly is difficult due to the nonconvexity introduced by the stationarity condition. To mitigate these issues, a common strategy is to relax the KKT condition using an ϵ-approximation 

∥∇ W Lt(A, ˆW )∥2 ≤ ϵ, 

where ϵ > 0 controls the approximation accuracy. Alternatively, a penalty-based formulation is used min  

> A, ˆW

Lv (A, ˆW ) + r · ∥∇ W Lt(A, ˆW )∥2, A ∈ A ,

where r > 0 is a penalty parameter. These relaxations convert the problem into an unconstrained and differentiable single-level formula-tion, enabling the use of gradient-based optimization methods. Gradients can be computed via implicit differentiation or unrolled optimization, and model and architecture parameters are updated either alter-nately or jointly using standard iterative methods such as stochastic gradient descent. In summary, KKT-based reformulations provide a practical framework for approximating bilevel NAS problems as single-level problems. While effective and compatible with gradient-based solvers, they remain challenging due to nonconvexity, scalability, and approximation accuracy in high-dimensional search spaces. 

> 1The KKT-based reformulation is presented only for illustrative purposes and is not intended to be an exact KKT reformulation of the bilevel NAS problem. Since only the first-order lower-level optimality condition is used, the resulting formulation should be interpreted as an approximation rather than a full KKT reformulation.

18 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

3.4.2 Surrogate Approximation-based NAS 

This class of methods utilizes surrogate models to alleviate the heavy computational demands of bilevel optimization in NAS. Instead of performing repeated and costly evaluations of candidate architectures or solving nested optimization problems from scratch, surrogate models are employed to approximate critical elements of the bilevel structure. These approximations serve to significantly speed up the search process while maintaining competitive solution quality. Surrogates can target different aspects of the optimization problem ranging from the upper-level objective and constraint sets to the lower-level solution mappings and optimal value functions [2]. By intelligently integrating these models, surrogate-based NAS approaches enable more efficient and scalable navigation of the architecture design space. 

• Surrogate for the Upper-Level Problem 

min  

> A, ˆW

˜Lv (A, ˆW ) subject to 



ˆW ∈ argmin  

> W∈W

Lt(A, W ),A ∈ A

Here, ˜Lv is a surrogate model that approximates the upper-level validation loss. This formulation reduces evaluation overhead by directly learning a cheaper-to-evaluate proxy for the upper-level objective. Such an approach is typically employed when the upper-level function evaluation is com-putationally expensive, as may occur in engineering applications involving finite element analysis. 

• Surrogate for the Lower-Level Optimal Value Function ( φ-mapping) 

min  

> A,W

Lv (A, W ) subject to 

(

Lt(A, W ) ≤ ˜φ(A),A ∈ A

In this formulation, ˜ φ(A) approximates the optimal value function 

φ(A) := inf   

> W∈W

Lt(A, W )By replacing the inner optimization with a learned upper bound on the optimal value, this surrogate constrains feasible weights without explicitly solving the lower-level problem. 

• Surrogate for the Reaction Set Mapping ( Ψ-mapping) 

min  

> A, ˆW

Lv (A, ˆW ) subject to 

( ˆW ∈ ˜Ψ( A),A ∈ A

Here, ˜Ψ( A) represents a surrogate set-valued mapping that approximates the reaction set Ψ( A) := argmin  

> W∈W

Lt(A, W )This relaxation accounts for uncertainty or variability in lower-level solutions and allows for more flexible modeling of solution behavior. The study in [132] demonstrates this approach in the context of HPO tasks. 

• Surrogate for the Choice Function ( ψ-mapping) 

min  

> A

Lv (A, ˜ψ(A)) subject to A ∈ A

In this case, ˜ψ(A) is a surrogate model that directly approximates the choice function 

ψ(A) ∈ argmin  

> W∈W

Lt(A, W )This surrogate choice function returns a singleton that is a functional approximation of a lower-level optimizer. The Ψ-mapping and ψ-mapping approximation approaches differ only in the presence of multiple lower-level optimal solutions. 19 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. Most of these approaches effectively transform the bilevel NAS problem into a single-level constrained optimization problem, wherein the solution to the inner problem is approximated through surrogate mod-els or additional constraints. Subsequently, penalty or augmented Lagrangian techniques are employed to solve the resulting formulation efficiently. For instance, consider the following surrogate-based reformu-lation (surrogate φ-mapping), which represents NAS as a single-level nonlinear constrained optimization problem and thereafter a penalty-based solution approach is utilized: min  

> A,W

Lv (A, W )subject to: Lt(A, W ) − ˜φ(A) ≤ 0(12) The constraint in Formulation (12) enforces that the current weights W yield a training loss that is close to the optimal achievable value, thereby approximating the lower-level solution of the original bilevel formulation. To solve this constrained problem, we employ the augmented Lagrangian method. Let 

P (A, W ) := Lt(A, W ) − ˜φ(A)denote the constraint residual, R > 0 be a penalty parameter, and μ the Lagrange multiplier. The resulting optimization problem is min  

> A,W

Z(A, W ) = Lv (A, W ) + R

2 P (A, W )2 + μ P (A, W )This augmented objective guides the optimization toward architectures that not only minimize val-idation loss but also produce training losses close to their optimal values. The penalty and multiplier terms progressively enforce the training loss constraint during optimization. This approach, referred to as Penalized Validation Method (PVM), is discussed in [2]. By utilizing surrogate modeling in conjunction with augmented Lagrangian optimization, PVM eliminates the need for repeated inner-level training and enables tractable and scalable architecture search. Another work based on penalty methods for HPO is [133]. As discussed earlier, trust-region-based approaches provide a well-founded methodology for solving bilevel problems. These methods address the problem iteratively by solving a sequence of locally ap-proximated subproblems, thereby giving rise to another surrogate approximation-based strategy. At each iteration, a trust region-a localized neighborhood around the current solution-is established, within which the original bilevel objective is approximated. This approximation typically employs first-order Taylor expansions for the upper-level objective and constraints, and second-order expansions for the lower-level objective, resulting in a linear–quadratic BOP that is more tractable to solve. The solution to each subproblem then suggests a candidate update for the upper-level variables. Crucially, the size of the trust-region is adjusted dynamically: it is expanded when the predicted improvement aligns well with the actual performance gain, and contracted otherwise. This adaptive behavior promotes both stability and efficiency in the optimization process, particularly in settings characterized by high sensitivity to upper-level variations. By preserving the bilevel structure across iterations and employing localized ap-proximations, trust-region-based methods achieve reliable convergence and exhibit strong generalization capabilities. In the unrestricted setting, the study in [134] proposes adapting regularization hyperpa-rameters in neural networks by constructing compact approximations of the best-response mapping that relate hyperparameters to their corresponding optimal weights and biases. This approach bears concep-tual similarity to trust-region methods [27], which iteratively solve locally simplified bilevel subproblems to approximate the original formulation. This connection highlights the suitability of trust-region prin-ciples for NAS, where localized surrogate approximations can effectively balance approximation quality and computational efficiency. 

3.4.3 Hypergradient-based NAS 

To address the bilevel NAS, these methods compute the gradient of the upper-level objective (validation loss) with respect to the upper-level variables (architecture parameters) while explicitly incorporating the optimality conditions of the lower-level problem (model optimality). The resulting derivative is commonly referred to as the hypergradient. These approaches account for the dependence of the optimal weights on the architecture. Hypergradient-based NAS methods relax the discrete architecture search space into a continuous domain, enabling the use of gradient-based optimization. 20 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. The indirect dependence is incorporated by differentiating through the lower-level optimization, yield-ing more informed updates at the cost of higher computation. Thus, it accounts for the indirect depen-dence of validation loss on architecture through the optimal weights. This is expressed by the total derivative 

dLv (A, ˆW )

dA = ∂Lv

∂A + ∂Lv

∂ ˆW · d ˆWdA 

Here, the first term reflects the direct effect of A, while the second term captures how changes in A

influence the optimal weights and hence the validation loss. By approximating these hypergradients, typically via implicit differentiation or reverse-mode auto-matic differentiation one can carry out architecture optimization in a theoretically grounded and compu-tationally efficient manner. In practice, different variants of gradient descent can be employed for the architecture updates using the hypergradients. Batch Gradient Descent (BGD) computes exact gradients over the entire dataset, yielding stable but computationally expensive updates. Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) uses a sin-gle random sample per update, making the process faster but noisier. Mini Batch Gradient Descent (MBGD) strikes a balance by using small subsets of data, offering both efficiency and stability. Ex-tensions such as momentum, RMSProp, and Adam further accelerate convergence and smooth the opti-mization trajectory by incorporating historical gradient information and adaptive learning rates. Overall, hypergradient-based NAS provides an efficient mechanism to optimize architectures by leveraging differen-tiability, achieving competitive performance while incurring only a fraction of the computational expense required by black-box NAS methods such as based on RL or EC. [135] demonstrates the hypergradient-based hyperparameter optimization. A prominent example of hypergradient-based NAS is the Differentiable Architecture Search (DARTS) algorithm, which leverages this approach to iteratively refine architectures using gradient-based updates. Numerous variants evolved from the original DARTS framework, each addressing specific limitations or enhancing performance. The foundational method, DARTS [32], introduced a differentiable neural architecture search framework operating in a continuous search space, which significantly improved effi-ciency and competitiveness over traditional RL and EC based approaches. To address computational and stability issues, P-DARTS [54] was proposed as a progressive search space approximation with regulariza-tion, enhancing the robustness of the search process. Similarly, R-DARTS [55] focused on robustness by analyzing the architectural space and integrating regularization to mitigate performance collapse. PC-DARTS [51] improved efficiency and stability by employing a partially-connected search space, thereby reducing memory usage without compromising performance. Att-DARTS [68] incorporated attention mechanisms to enhance accuracy, while DARTS+ [57] introduced an early stopping criterion to combat overfitting and excessive use of skip connections. Fair DARTS [56] tackled the issue of unfair compe-tition among candidate operations that led to suboptimal selections. Further extending the paradigm, DE-DARTS [67] employed dynamic attention networks to enhance architecture exploration, and EG-DARTS [136] combined gradient-based search with evolutionary strategies to improve performance while reducing architectural complexity. More recent contributions such as Relax-DARTS [65] aimed to alle-viate overfitting and enhance generalization. STO-DARTS [63] introduced mechanisms to escape local minima, while OSTR-DARTS [69] addressed search process degeneration using a magnitude-based oper-ation selection scheme. To embed semantic understanding, Semantic DARTS [70] utilized Masked Image Modeling (MIM) and classification to improve generalizability. Targeting search efficiency, LMD-DARTS [66] used dynamic sampling to prune weak operations and reallocate weights, accelerating the search and reducing memory demands. Finally, HN-DARTS [137] redefined the traditional search space by introduc-ing the glore unit in place of standard cells, achieving compact yet accurate architectures. Collectively, these contributions represented a rich and evolving landscape of hypergradient-based NAS methods, each advancing the scalability, reliability, and effectiveness of differentiable architecture search methods. 

• Differentiable Architecture Search. NAS, as discussed earlier, is concerned with the auto-mated discovery of network architectures that achieve superior task performance. In CNNs, this process operates over a predefined search space consisting of candidate operations such as convo-lutions, pooling layers, and skip connections. The goal is to identify an optimal composition of these operations that maximizes validation performance under the assumption that each candidate architecture is trained to convergence. This is depicted in Figure 13. Traditional NAS methods formulate the problem as a discrete optimization task, where each edge in the network must select one operation from a finite set and each node must determine its incoming connections. This re-sults in a combinatorial search space that grows exponentially with network depth and width. For 21 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. Operation Set of Non -Zero     

> Candidate Operations op1 op2 op3
> op1 Some
> Operation
> Some
> Other
> Operation
> Cat
> 94%
> Not Cat
> 6%

Figure 13: Building task-specific networks by selecting op-erations from a search space. op1  op2  op3        

> +
> A1
> A2A3
> A1* A2* A3* ++
> ||
> x
> mixed_op
> A1* op1(x) A2* op2(x) A3* op3(x) ++
> ||
> mixed_op(x)

Figure 14: Modeling edges as weighted sums of candidate operations. instance, even a simple MLP with 10 layers and between 1 to 10 neurons per layer admits 10 10 

possible configurations. Similarly, a small NAS search space may contain an order of 10 18 candidate architectures [32]. Exploring such spaces using RL or evolutionary algorithms often requires thou-sands of GPU-days, rendering them impractical. This computational bottleneck has motivated the development of DARTS, which addresses the challenge by relaxing the discrete optimization into a continuous formulation, thereby enabling efficient gradient-based search. 

Continuous Relaxation: The core idea of differentiable NAS is to replace discrete operation with a continuous mixture of all candidate operations. Specifically, each edge ( i, j ) in the Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) is represented as a weighted sum of candidate operations, with weights determined by architecture parameters shared across the network. The relaxation is formalized as 

o(i,j )(x) = X

> o∈O

exp( A(i,j ) 

> o

)

P 

> o′∈O

exp( A(i,j ) 

> o′

) o(x),

where O denotes the set of candidate operations and A(i,j ) 

> o

are learnable architecture parame-ters. The softmax ensures positive mixture coefficients summing to one. Figure 14 illustrates this relaxation. 

Typical Cell Structure: To maintain tractability, most differentiable NAS methods restrict the search to a modular computational unit known as a cell, which is a DAG of nodes (feature maps) and edges (operations). Once an optimal cell is found, it is stacked repeatedly to construct the final architecture. A simplified cell structure is shown in Figure 15, where input feature maps are sequentially transformed through mixed operations to produce output feature maps. A typical cell, illustrated in Figure 16, is a DAG where nodes represent feature maps and edges denote candidate operations. Normal and reduction cells alternate to construct deeper architectures. 

Optimization Procedure: DARTS [32] formulates NAS as a continuous BOP. Each cell is mod-eled as a DAG with two input nodes, four intermediate nodes, and one output node obtained by concatenating selected intermediates. The set of available operations, O, comprises identity mappings (skip connections), separable convolutions with kernel sizes of 3 ×3 and 5 ×5, dilated separable convolutions with kernel sizes of 3 × 3 and 5 × 5, max pooling and average pooling with a 3 × 3 kernel, as well as a zero operation indicating no connection. Two distinct cell types are considered: normal cells, which preserve spatial resolution, and reduction cells, which downsample spatial dimensions. These cells are alternated in a stacking strategy to form the full architecture, as shown in Figure 17, balancing feature extraction and hierarchical abstrac-tion. The feature representation at any node j, denoted as x(j), is obtained by aggregating the outputs from all its predecessor nodes. Formally, it is expressed as 

x(j) = X

> i<j

o(i,j ) x(i),

where o(i,j ) represents the operation applied on the input x(i) coming from node i to node j.The choice of which operation to use on each edge ( i, j ) is determined through the DARTS 22 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. mixed_op 

> mixed_op
> mixed_op
> Input Feature Map
> Output Feature Map
> Simple Cell

Figure 15: A simple cell structure under continu-ous relaxation. 0

> Previous Previous Cell Output
> 1
> 2
> 3
> concat
> Previous Cell Output
> Cell Output

Figure 16: A typical cell as a DAG. 

Figure 17: A cell-based neural network architecture. optimization framework. In this framework, each edge is associated with a set of candidate operations O, and a corresponding weight vector A(i,j ) ∈ R|O| , where |O| is the number of candidate operations. The vector A(i,j ) defines how much importance (or probability) is assigned to each candidate operation on edge ( i, j ). After optimization, the final architecture is obtained by selecting, for each edge, the operation with the highest weight 

o∗(i,j ) = argmax 

> o∈O

A∗(i,j ) 

> o

,

where A∗(i,j ) denotes the vector of optimized weights on edge ( i, j ). The DARTS optimization procedure alternates between updating the architecture parameters A, which minimize the validation loss, and the model weights W , which minimize the training loss. Formally, to update the architecture, the gradient of the validation loss with respect to A is approximated as 

∇ALv (A, ˆW ) ≈ ∇ ALv (A, W − ξ∇W Lt(A, W )) ,

where ξ is a small learning rate for one-step unrolled optimization of the model training problem. Setting ξ = 0 yields a first-order approximation, while ξ̸ = 0 introduces a second-order correction 

∇ALv (A, ˆW ) ≈ ∇ ALv (A, W ′) − ξ∇2 

> A,W

Lt(A, W )∇W ′ Lv (A, W ′), (13) with W ′ = W − ξ∇W Lt(A, W ). The second-order term captures how changes in the architec-ture affect the optimal weights and can be efficiently approximated via finite differences. For a detailed discussion of DARTS, readers may refer to [32]. We next discuss another bilevel theoretic NAS method based on auxiliary mathematical program-ming framework for differentiable neural architecture search that enables precise, localized updates by jointly optimizing over both the architecture and model parameter spaces. 23 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

3.4.4 Auxiliary Program-based NAS 

This approach determines the steepest descent direction by solving a carefully formulated auxiliary math-ematical problem that ensures updates to the architecture parameters consistently decrease the validation loss while simultaneously maintaining the optimality of the model parameters. By explicitly incorporating the optimality conditions of the lower-level (training) problem, the method guarantees feasibility within the bilevel optimization context and enforces a mathematically justified descent direction. Importantly, under certain simplifying assumptions, the resulting mathematical program may reduce to a simpler one, such as an LP, thereby offering a computationally efficient alternative, though the corresponding descent direction may not be the steepest. This mathematical optimization framework thus unifies rigorous op-timization principles with practical considerations, providing an effective solution to the NAS problem. Let us formalize the approach by considering a neural network architecture parameterized by A ∈ Rp

(representing architecture parameters), and model weights denoted by W ∈ Rq . The objective is to address the following BOP min  

> A

Lv (A, ˆW (A)) subject to ˆW (A) = argmin  

> W∈W

Lt(A, W ),

where Lv is assumed differentiable and Lt is twice differentiable. Considering the Hessian of Lt with respect to ( A, W ) at the point ( A0, W 0), we write 

∇2(A,W )Lt(A0, W 0) = 

H11 H12 

H21 H22 



By differentiating the first-order optimality condition of the lower-level problem, ∇W Lt(A, W ) = 0, with respect to A, the following Jacobian equation is obtained 

H22 

∂W ∂A + H21 = 0 This relationship implies that for a small change dA in the architecture parameters, the corresponding change dW in the model parameters, required to preserve optimality of the lower-level problem, is given by 

dW = ∂W ∂A dA = −H−122 H21 dA

To analyze the effect of these updates on the validation loss, we consider the first-order Taylor’s expansion of Lv around the current parameters ( A0, W 0)

Lv (A0 + td A, W 0 + td W ) ≈ L v (A0, W 0) + t (⟨∇ ALv , d A⟩ + ⟨∇ W Lv , d W ⟩)To ensure that the update leads to a decrease in the validation loss while maintaining lower-level opti-mality, we seek the steepest descent direction by solving the following optimization problem min 

> dA,d W

⟨∇ ALv , d A⟩ + ⟨∇ W Lv , d W ⟩

subject to: H21 dA + H22 dW = 0 

∥dA∥2 ≤ 1(14) This formulation is an SOCP, where the affine constraint enforces the preservation of lower-level optimal-ity. For computational efficiency, the norm constraint can be relaxed to a box constraint, −1 ≤ dA ≤ 1, resulting in an LP (15) min 

> dA,d W

⟨∇ ALv , d A⟩ + ⟨∇ W Lv , d W ⟩

subject to: H21 dA + H22 dW = 0 

− 1 ≤ dA ≤ 1(15) After determining the optimal descent direction ( d∗

> A

, d ∗ 

> W

) by solving the above auxiliary mathematical problems, the parameters are updated as follows (Ak+1 , W k+1 ) ← (Ak, W k) + t(d∗

> A

, d ∗ 

> W

)Since W k+1 may not exactly satisfy the first-order optimality conditions due to approximation or inexact SOCP solutions, the model parameters are further refined by resolving the lower-level optimization with a warm start 

W k+1 = argmin  

> W∈W

Lt(Ak+1 , W )24 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

Figure 18: Determination of the optimal step-size ( t∗). This iterative process ensures that each update direction yields descent in the validation loss while maintaining, or restoring, the optimality of the model parameters with respect to the training loss. The optimal step-size ( t∗) used in the update of parameters can be obtained by a bit of additional experiment as illustrated in the Figure 18 [43]. Starting from the current point ( A0, W 0), the search direction ( d∗

> A

, d ∗ 

> W

)is determined to achieve descent in the validation loss while maintaining lower-level optimality. The figure depicts the trajectories of the training and validation losses along this direction, with the optimal step-size (t∗) identified by minimizing the validation loss along the update path ( A0 + td ∗

> A

, W 0 + td ∗ 

> W

). In Auxiliary Program-based Neural Architecture Search (AP-NAS), the computation of the Hes-sian matrix, which encapsulates second-order curvature information, poses significant computational and memory challenges due to the typically large number of model parameters involved. To make this process tractable, various Hessian approximation strategies have been introduced. One widely adopted technique is the L-BFGS method, which offers an efficient alternative by storing only a limited number of past updates to parameters and gradients. This allows for an implicit construction of the Hessian inverse, leading to a per-iteration complexity of O(mn ), where m denotes the memory size (number of stored updates) and n represents the dimensionality of the parameter space. Another practical approximation involves representing the Hessian as a weighted sum of rank-one matrices, which are derived from the differences in parameter values and gradient evaluations between consecutive optimization steps [138]. These methods significantly reduce the computational burden while preserving enough curvature infor-mation for effective optimization. Given the impracticality of computing and storing the full Hessian in large-scale models, where it could demand memory in the order of tens of terabytes, reduction tech-niques are essential. One such strategy involves selecting only a small subset of model parameters for which second-order derivatives are evaluated [138]. This yields a reduced Hessian matrix that still re-tains critical information for guiding upper-level parameter updates, especially when paired with efficient approximations like L-BFGS. This mathematical framework is broadly applicable for enhancing any differentiable neural architec-ture search algorithm. For example, the framework enhances DARTS, yielding two variants of DARTS, LP-DARTS and SOCP-DARTS, that reformulate the architecture update as linear and second-order cone programs, respectively. Beyond the problem class (LP vs. SOCP), the two variants also differ in how they select model parameters to construct the reduced Hessian matrix and the validation gradients used to solve the upper-level problem. LP-DARTS employs a deterministic criterion known as Gradient Norm Per Parameter (GNPP). This metric evaluates each tensor of model parameters based on the normalized magnitude of its training loss gradient, favoring selections with higher gradient norms relative to their size. Mathematically, GNPP is computed as the Euclidean norm of a parameter tensor’s gradient divided by the total number of its elements, thereby balancing the influence of parameter scale and sensitivity. The tensor with the maximum GNPP is selected for inclusion in the reduced Hessian computation, en-25 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. suring that the most impactful parameters in terms of gradient dynamics are prioritized. In contrast, SOCP-DARTS adopts a random selection strategy to choose parameter tensors for reduced Hessian and validation gradient evaluations. This approach mitigates bias in parameter updates by diversifying the subset of parameters considered across iterations. The strategy involves constructing a candidate set of parameter tensors whose size does not exceed a small fraction of the total parameter count. From this candidate set, a fixed number of tensors are randomly sampled, ensuring that the overall number of selected parameters remains small. This randomness allows for a broader coverage of the parameter space over multiple updates and avoids consistently favoring only the most active gradients. The random sam-pling mechanism emphasize diversity and fairness in parameter update opportunities. When integrated within a SOCP formulation, this sampling strategy ensures that updates to the architecture parameters maintain bilevel feasibility by enforcing the lower-level optimality condition, while achieving descent in validation loss. By combining systematic parameter selection methods with computationally efficient Hessian approximations, both LP-DARTS and SOCP-DARTS offer scalable and theoretically grounded frameworks for neural architecture search. The LP-DARTS method leverages gradient-based heuristics for informed parameter subset construction, while SOCP-DARTS emphasizes stochasticity and broad exploration. Interestingly, the architecture update in AP-NAS is similar to that in hypergradient-based methods. The key difference is that AP-NAS computes a descent direction that always preserves the optimality of the model parameters. In contrast, hypergradient-based methods update only the architec-ture parameters using the hypergradient direction, which generally disturbs the optimality of the model parameters. Other than the NAS methods discussed above, there are several alternative perspectives for architec-ture search. For example, the authors in [139] considered Neuron Gating and Mixed Activation (NGMA) for architecture search. First, Neuron Gating (NG) can be modeled using continuous architecture pa-rameters, where the parameters associated with hidden neurons control their effective participation in the network. Second, in Mixed Activation (MA)-based architecture search, each hidden neuron is associ-ated with a mixed activation function defined as a convex combination of candidate activation functions drawn from a predefined set. By optimizing the corresponding mixing coefficients, the search process ultimately selects a single optimal activation function for each neuron. In the third setting, both per-spectives are combined, leading to NGMA-based architecture search. These three approaches naturally give rise to bilevel optimization formulations, which can be solved using the bilevel theory-based NAS methods discussed above. 

# 4 Comparative Results of NAS Methods from Literature 

NAS has evolved into one of the most dynamic subfields in deep learning, with a diverse set of method-ologies demonstrating competitive results across benchmark datasets such as CIFAR-10, ImageNet, and more recently, large-scale transformer and graph domains. To provide a unified perspective on perfor-mance trends, this section consolidates results from key NAS algorithms, highlighting accuracy, parame-ter efficiency, and computational requirements. The data presented are drawn from original studies and comparative analysis in the NAS literature [45, 46, 50, 32, 51, 52, 53, 72, 73, 79, 71, 80, 54, 63]. 

# 4.1 NAS Methods on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet 

Table 7 summarizes representative NAS methods spanning RL, EC, differentiable optimization, and meta-learning paradigms. Each approach is evaluated based on Top-1 accuracy, parameter count, and computational cost (architecture search time) measured in GPU days. The results clearly show the efficiency gains achieved by differentiable NAS and one-shot frameworks compared to earlier black-box methods. 

# 4.2 DARTS Variants Under Computational Constraints 

Table 8 presents a consolidated summary of the time-constrained final evaluations on CIFAR-10 and the corresponding transferability results on ImageNet. The architectures for DARTS, LP-DARTS, and SOCP-DARTS were obtained through controlled architecture search and optimal architecture selection experiments conducted for approximately the same duration, ensuring a fair comparison under equal com-putational budgets [138]. For the remaining algorithms (P-DARTS, PC-DARTS, STO-DARTSv1, and STO-DARTSv2), the optimal architectures were adopted directly from their respective original publica-tions [54, 51, 63]. All required experiments, including search, selection, and evaluation, were performed 26 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. Table 7: Comparative performance of representative NAS methods on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet bench-marks.                                                                               

> Method Search Type Search Space Dataset Top-1 Acc. (%) Params (M) GPU Days
> NASNet-A [45] RL-based Cell-based CIFAR-10 (ImageNet) 97.35 (74.0) 3.3 (5.3) 2000 ENAS [46] RL (Weight Sharing) Cell-based CIFAR-10 97.11 4.6 0.5 AmoebaNet-A [50] Evolutionary Cell-based CIFAR-10 (ImageNet) 96.66 (74.5) 3.2 (5.1) 3150 DARTS [32] Differentiable Continuous CIFAR-10 (ImageNet) 97.24 (73.3) 3.3 (4.7) 4PC-DARTS [51] Differentiable Continuous CIFAR-10 (ImageNet) 97.43 (74.9) 3.6 (5.3) 0.1 ProxylessNAS [52] Differentiable Hardware-aware CIFAR-10 (ImageNet) 97.92 (75.1) 5.7 (7.1) 4FBNet [53] Differentiable Hardware-aware ImageNet 74.9 5.5 9MnasNet [72] RL + Hardware Mobile Search ImageNet 75.2 3.9 4.5 EfficientNet-B0 [73] Compound Scaling Platform-aware ImageNet 76.3 5.3 -Once-for-All [79] One-shot (Meta) Elastic Supernet ImageNet 76.9 7.7 1.7 Autoformer [71] Differentiable Transformer ImageNet 82.4 54.0 -GraphNAS [80] RL-based Graph Neural Nets Cora (Citeseer) 84.2 (73.1) --

entirely on a CPU-based platform. Despite comparable search and evaluation times, both LP-DARTS and SOCP-DARTS achieve substantially higher accuracies and better parameter efficiency, demonstrating their effectiveness in discovering high-quality, competitive, and transferable architectures under limited computational resources. Table 8: Evaluation metrics for the best architectures on CIFAR-10 and their transferability on ImageNet under time-constrained settings.                                                

> Method CIFAR-10 ImageNet Test Acc. (%) Eval. Cost (CPU hours) Params (M) Top-1 (5) Acc. (%) Eval. Cost (CPU hours) Params (M)
> DARTS 82.57 19.66 3.38 39.09 (64.10) 99.36 5.81 LP-DARTS 92.56 19.91 1.66 42.50 (67.55) 99.32 3.46 SOCP-DARTS 90.56 20.65 2.23 44.02 (68.76) 101.32 4.11 P-DARTS 90.23 21.67 2.74 44.60 (69.38) 98.96 4.94 PC-DARTS 89.10 20.84 2.90 42.40 (67.39) 101.53 5.27 STO-DARTSv1 89.04 19.79 2.20 42.72 (67.78) 101.52 4.15 STO-DARTSv2 87.89 20.85 3.06 42.89 (68.05) 102.32 5.37

# 4.3 Analysis and Discussion 

The results from Table 7 reveal several noteworthy trends. Early NAS methods such as NASNet and AmoebaNet, which rely on RL or evolutionary strategies, achieve strong accuracy but demand thousands of GPU-days due to discrete search and full training of candidate architectures. The introduction of dif-ferentiable NAS methods such as DARTS and PC-DARTS marked a breakthrough in efficiency, reducing computational cost by three orders of magnitude while maintaining competitive accuracy. Hardware-aware designs such as ProxylessNAS, FBNet, and MnasNet further refined this efficiency by explicitly incorporating latency constraints during search, making them viable for mobile and embedded systems. Meta-learning approaches, such as Once-for-All and Autoformer, illustrate a shift toward scalable and adaptive NAS frameworks that can generalize across architectures and modalities. Once-for-All intro-duces elastic supernetworks, allowing the reuse of pre-trained subnetworks across multiple deployment scenarios, while Autoformer demonstrates that NAS principles extend beyond CNNs to transformer-based architectures. Collectively, these methods highlight an ongoing trend toward generalizable and hardware-efficient NAS. Furthermore, auxiliary programming frameworks (AP-NAS), such as LP-DARTS and SOCP-DARTS, demonstrate superior performance compared to several DARTS variants under our time-constrained experimental settings. It is important to note that the architectures for P-DARTS, PC-DARTS, and STO-DARTS were adopted directly from their original studies, in which extensive experimental efforts were made to identify optimal experimental configurations and used better compu-tational resources. Even under these conditions, the proposed AP-NAS frameworks exhibit competitive results, as summarized in Table 8. 

# 5 Summary and Emerging Trends 

The progression of NAS research reveals a clear trajectory toward greater automation, efficiency, and adaptability. Table 9 presents a concise comparison across NAS paradigms, emphasizing the trade-offs 27 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. between computational cost, scalability, and generalization. Table 9: Comparative characteristics of major NAS paradigms.                                    

> Paradigm Optimization Type Scalability Generalization Cost (GPU Days) Representative Works
> Reinforcement Learning Non-differentiable Medium Moderate High (1000+) NASNet, ENAS Evolutionary Computation Non-differentiable High Strong High (1000+) AmoebaNet, NSGA-NAS Bayesian Optimization Surrogate-based Medium Moderate Medium (100–200) BOHB, TPE-NAS Hypergradient-based NAS Differentiable Very High Strong Low (1–10) DARTS, PC-DARTS Meta / One-shot NAS Hybrid Very High Very Strong Very Low (¡2) Once-for-All Auxiliary Program-based NAS Differentiable Very High Strong Low (1–10) AP-NAS

Overall, differentiable and meta-learning approaches have clearly outperformed traditional RL and evolutionary methods in efficiency while achieving comparable levels of accuracy. The future of NAS is shifting toward multi-objective formulations, transferability across tasks, and integration with large-scale foundation models. These developments suggest a growing convergence between neural architec-ture search, model compression, and automated machine learning, marking a decisive step toward fully self-optimizing AI systems. The mathematical formulations presented by (14) and (15) have also been Table 10: Training, validation, and test metrics for CIFAR-10 considering 3 and 5 hyperparameters, with and without Hyperlocal Search.                                                                                                                                   

> Metrics CIFAR-10 (3HP) Without Hyperlocal Search CIFAR-10 (3HP) With Hyperlocal Search
> Grid Random TPE QMC Grid Random TPE QMC Training Loss 1.95 1.91 2.04 1.89 1.60 1.64 1.63 1.56 Validation Loss 2.95 2.92 2.96 2.92 2.59 2.61 2.56 2.56 Test Loss 3.05 3.02 3.10 3.00 2.68 2.69 2.65 2.63 Training Accuracy (%) 75.84 75.99 74.77 76.09 81.12 80.32 80.79 80.78 Validation Accuracy (%) 71.14 71.18 70.55 71.24 75.64 74.99 75.65 75.47 Test Accuracy (%) 68.48 68.51 68.09 68.52 72.59 72.12 72.63 72.43 Runtime (sec) 5348 5220 5316 5235 5597 5456 5552 5467
> Metrics CIFAR-10 (5HP) Without Hyperlocal Search CIFAR-10 (5HP) With Hyperlocal Search
> Grid Random TPE QMC Grid Random TPE QMC Training Loss 2.20 2.92 2.52 2.36 1.94 2.02 2.07 2.01 Validation Loss 3.25 3.32 3.48 3.42 3.02 3.05 3.06 3.07 Test Loss 3.35 3.39 3.58 3.50 3.02 3.15 3.16 3.17 Training Accuracy (%) 74.97 73.62 70.90 73.37 78.83 77.60 77.10 78.31 Validation Accuracy (%) 70.60 69.40 67.19 69.09 74.80 72.97 72.56 73.43 Test Accuracy (%) 68.27 67.13 65.06 66.71 71.99 70.25 70.04 70.68 Runtime (sec) 7455 7144 7367 7295 7789 7478 7712 7636

effectively employed for tuning other hyperparameters, such as regularization strengths, to obtain models that generalize better. This approach allows hyperlocal search, i.e. simultaneous local search on certain hyperparameters and model parameters, and is discussed in detail in [43]. To highlight its practical ben-efits, Table 10 reports one of the key experimental results from that study. In this experiment, several sampling-based hyperparameter optimization methods, namely grid search, random search, TPE-based Bayesian optimization, and Quasi-Monte Carlo (QMC) sampling, were first used to obtain near-optimal hyperparameters and corresponding models. The auxiliary mathematical program was then employed to perform hyperlocal search, which locally refines both model parameters and hyperparameters around these optima. In essence, hyperlocal search enhances any given optimal model by locally optimizing its hyperparameters and model parameters. As shown in Table 10, this approach yields consistent perfor-mance improvements through refined regularization tuning. Building on the idea of hyperlocal search, the authors in [140] extended the same principle to the fine-tuning of large transformer models that are prone to overfitting. A lightweight linear programming-based local search approach was employed to guide small, structured updates to the model parameters and hyperparameters during fine-tuning. When applied to GPT-2 Small on the WikiText-2 dataset, the proposed method effectively controlled over-28 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. fitting and improved the model’s generalization performance while enabling efficient fine-tuning across transformer layers, as summarized in Table 12. Table 11: Definitions of hyperparameters used in the experiments for fine-tuning GPT-2. 

Symbol Description NW E Number of warm-up epochs of training before initiating hyperlocal search 

NT B Number of tunable transformer blocks considered during fine-tuning 

NR Number of regularizers included in the bilevel regularization formulation 

NFULL/MLP Structural scope of fine-tuning, indicating whether the entire transformer block (FULL ) or only its MLP subcomponent ( MLP ) is tuned The various hyperparameter configurations used in the fine-tuning experiments are summarized in Table 11 and the results in Table 12 report the training, validation, and test perplexity (and corresponding loss) with and without hyperlocal search. Table 12: Training, validation, and test perplexity (PPL)/loss for WikiText-2 dataset with and without hyperlocal search.                                                                                                                                                 

> HP Sample Size PPL/ Loss Without HLS With HLS Test PPL
> ↓(%) NW E NT B NRNFULL/MLP
> 4718 Training 35.84/3.58 35.84/3.58 0321/2 487 Validation 35.60/3.57 35.60/3.57 558 Testing 34.51/3.54 34.51/3.54 0.00 4718 Training 21.71/3.08 21.71/3.08 1321/2 487 Validation 22.93/3.13 22.93/3.13 558 Testing 22.38/3.11 22.38/3.11 0.00 4718 Training 14.32/2.66 14.32/2.66 10 321/2 487 Validation 23.26/3.15 23.26/3.15 558 Testing 22.82/3.13 22.82/3.13 0.00 4718 Training 12.20/2.50 12.37/2.52 15 321/2 487 Validation 24.58/3.20 24.48/3.20 558 Testing 24.23/3.19 24.14/3.18 0.37 4718 Training 10.56/2.36 11.20/2.42 20 321/2 487 Validation 26.22/3.27 25.81/3.25 558 Testing 25.92/3.26 25.48/3.24 1.70 4718 Training 9.24/2.22 10.50/2.35 25 321/2 487 Validation 28.13/3.34 26.87/3.29 558 Testing 27.89/3.33 26.56/3.28 4.77 4718 Training 8.21/2.11 10.17/2.32 30 321/2 487 Validation 30.00/3.40 28.05/3.33 558 Testing 29.78/3.39 27.77/3.32 6.75 4718 Training 7.31/1.99 10.16/2.32 35 321/2 487 Validation 32.60/3.48 28.73/3.36 558 Testing 32.43/3.48 28.38/3.35 12.49 4718 Training 1.30/0.26 1.62/0.48 25 442/2 487 Validation 205.62/5.33 152.73/5.03 558 Testing 204.86/5.32 153.03/5.03 25.30 4718 Training 1.30/0.26 1.61/0.48 25 552/3 487 Validation 205.62/5.33 151.38/5.02 558 Testing 204.86/5.32 151.71/5.02 25.94

# 6 Conclusions 

This paper has reviewed the role of bilevel optimization in NAS, with an emphasis on how optimization theory can guide automated architecture design. We categorized existing NAS methods into two broad classes: sampling-based approaches, which rely on different sampling strategies for candidate architec-tures, and bilevel-theoretic approaches, which cast the search process in an optimization framework that explicitly accounts for the interaction between architecture parameters and network weights. Within the latter class, we placed particular focus on differentiable NAS methodologies, where a differentiable archi-tecture is assumed and bilevel optimization approaches are used to search for the best architecture. A comparative analysis highlighted that bilevel-theoretic approaches generally achieve stronger performance than sampling-based methods, both in terms of accuracy and efficiency. 29 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. In summary, this paper highlights how bilevel optimization provides both theoretical rigor and empiri-cal benefits for NAS. Results show that recent methods with differentiable architectures and second-order information hold significant promise, therefore, future research may explore scalable structured Hessian approximations (e.g., block-diagonal or staircase forms), develop hybrid optimization schemes that unify other differentiable NAS methods with the discussed auxiliary mathematical programming framework, and extend these ideas to broader search spaces and application domains. Collectively, these directions position bilevel optimization as a promising foundation for the next generation of efficient NAS frame-works. 

# References 

[1] Jerome Bracken and James T McGill. Mathematical programs with optimization problems in the constraints. Operations research , 21(1):37–44, 1973. [2] Ankur Sinha, Tanmay Khandait, and Raja Mohanty. A gradient-based bilevel optimization ap-proach for tuning regularization hyperparameters. Optimization Letters , 18(6):1383–1404, 2024. [3] Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Neural architecture search: A survey. 

Journal of Machine Learning Research , 20(55):1–21, 2019. [4] Ankur Sinha, Pekka Malo, and Kalyanmoy Deb. A review on bilevel optimization: From classical to evolutionary approaches and applications. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation , 22 (2):276–295, 2017. [5] Ankur Sinha, Pekka Malo, and Kalyanmoy Deb. Transportation policy formulation as a multi-objective bilevel optimization problem. In 2015 IEEE Congress on Evolutionary Computation (CEC) , pages 1651–1658. IEEE, 2015. [6] Luce Brotcorne, Martine Labb´ e, Patrice Marcotte, and Gilles Savard. A bilevel model for toll optimization on a multicommodity transportation network. Transportation science , 35(4):345–358, 2001. [7] Martine Labb´ e, Patrice Marcotte, and Gilles Savard. A bilevel model of taxation and its application to optimal highway pricing. Management science , 44(12-part-1):1608–1622, 1998. [8] Kristin P Bennett, Gautam Kunapuli, Jing Hu, and Jong-Shi Pang. Bilevel optimization and machine learning. In IEEE world congress on computational intelligence , pages 25–47. Springer, 2008. [9] Luca Franceschi, Paolo Frasconi, Saverio Salzo, Riccardo Grazzi, and Massimiliano Pontil. Bilevel programming for hyperparameter optimization and meta-learning. In International conference on machine learning , pages 1568–1577. PMLR, 2018. [10] Takayuki Okuno, Akiko Takeda, Akihiro Kawana, and Motokazu Watanabe. On lp-hyperparameter learning via bilevel nonsmooth optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research , 22(245):1–47, 2021. [11] Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. Towards deep learning models resistant to adversarial attacks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.06083 ,2017. [12] Varun Suryan, Ankur Sinha, Pekka Malo, and Kalyanmoy Deb. Handling inverse optimal control problems using evolutionary bilevel optimization. In 2016 IEEE congress on evolutionary compu-tation (CEC) , pages 1893–1900. IEEE, 2016. [13] Timothy CY Chan, Rafid Mahmood, and Ian Yihang Zhu. Inverse optimization: Theory and applications. Operations Research , 73(2):1046–1074, 2025. [14] Patrice Marcotte. Network design problem with congestion effects: A case of bilevel programming. 

Mathematical programming , 34(2):142–162, 1986. [15] Marcia Fampa, LA Barroso, D Candal, and Luidi Simonetti. Bilevel optimization applied to strate-gic pricing in competitive electricity markets. Computational Optimization and Applications , 39: 121–142, 2008. 30 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. [16] Prasanna Ramamoorthy, Sachin Jayaswal, Ankur Sinha, and Navneet Vidyarthi. Multiple allo-cation hub interdiction and protection problems: Model formulations and solution approaches. 

European Journal of Operational Research , 270(1):230–245, 2018. [17] Mathieu Dahan, Lina Sela, and Saurabh Amin. Network inspection for detecting strategic attacks. 

Operations Research , 70(2):1008–1024, 2022. [18] Prasanna Ramamoorthy, Sachin Jayaswal, Ankur Sinha, and Navneet Vidyarthi. An exact method for trilevel hub location problem with interdiction. European Journal of Operational Research , 319 (3):696–710, 2024. [19] Kuntal Som, D Thirumulanathan, and Joydeep Dutta. Bilevel programming problems: a view through set-valued optimization. Annals of Operations Research , pages 1–26, 2025. [20] Gemayqzel Bouza Allende and Georg Still. Solving bilevel programs with the KKT-approach. 

Mathematical programming , 138:309–332, 2013. [21] Stephan Dempe and Alain B Zemkoho. KKT reformulation and necessary conditions for optimality in nonsmooth bilevel optimization. SIAM Journal on Optimization , 24(4):1639–1669, 2014. [22] Ankur Sinha, Tharo Soun, and Kalyanmoy Deb. Using Karush-Kuhn-Tucker proximity measure for solving bilevel optimization problems. Swarm and evolutionary computation , 44:496–510, 2019. [23] Gilles Savard and Jacques Gauvin. The steepest descent direction for the nonlinear bilevel pro-gramming problem. Operations Research Letters , 15(5):265–272, 1994. [24] Lu´ ıs Nunes Vicente, Gilles Savard, and Joaquim J. J´ udice. Descent approaches for quadratic bilevel programming. Journal of Optimization Theory and Applications , 81:379–399, 1994. [25] Guoshan Liu, Jiye Han, and Shouyang Wang. A trust region algorithm for bilevel programing problems. Chinese Science Bulletin , 43(10):820–824, 1998. [26] Patrice Marcotte, Gilles Savard, and DL Zhu. A trust region algorithm for nonlinear bilevel pro-gramming. Operations research letters , 29(4):171–179, 2001. [27] Benoˆ ıt Colson, Patrice Marcotte, and Gilles Savard. A trust-region method for nonlinear bilevel programming: algorithm and computational experience. Computational Optimization and Appli-cations , 30:211–227, 2005. [28] Yo Ishizuka and Eitaro Aiyoshi. Double penalty method for bilevel optimization problems. Annals of Operations Research , 34:73–88, 1992. [29] D. J. White and G. Anandalingam. A penalty function approach for solving bi-level linear programs. 

Journal of Global Optimization , 3:397–419, 1993. [30] Thomas Kleinert and Martin Schmidt. Computing feasible points of bilevel problems with a penalty alternating direction method. INFORMS Journal on Computing , 33(1):198–215, 2021. [31] Md Monjurul Islam, Hemant Kumar Singh, and Tapabrata Ray. A surrogate assisted approach for single-objective bilevel optimization. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , 21(5): 681–696, 2017. [32] Hanxiao Liu, Karen Simonyan, and Yiming Yang. Darts: Differentiable architecture search. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2019. URL https://openreview. net/forum?id=S1eYHoC5FX .[33] Richard Mathieu, L. Pittard, and G. Anandalingam. Genetic algorithm based approach to bi-level linear programming. Operations Research , 28(1):1–21, 1994. [34] X. Zhu, Q. Yu, and X. Wang. A hybrid differential evolution algorithm for solving nonlinear bilevel programming with linear constraints. In Cognitive Informatics, 2006. ICCI 2006. 5th IEEE International Conference on , volume 1, pages 126–131. IEEE, 2006. [35] Jaqueline S. Angelo and Helio J. C. Barbosa. A study on the use of heuristics to solve a bilevel programming problem. International Transactions in Operational Research , 22(5):861–882, 2015. 31 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. [36] Ankur Sinha, Pekka Malo, Anton Frantsev, and Kalyanmoy Deb. Finding optimal strategies in a multi-period multi-leader-follower stackelberg game using an evolutionary algorithm. Computers & Operations Research , 41:374–385, 2014. [37] Ankur Sinha, Pekka Malo, and Kalyanmoy Deb. Evolutionary algorithm for bilevel optimization using approximations of the lower level optimal solution mapping. European Journal of Operational Research , 257(2):395–411, 2017. [38] Emmanuel Kieffer, Gr´ egoire Danoy, Pascal Bouvry, and Anass Nagih. Bayesian optimization ap-proach of general bi-level problems. In Proceedings of the Genetic and Evolutionary Computation Conference Companion , pages 1614–1621, 2017. [39] Ankur Sinha, Zhichao Lu, Kalyanmoy Deb, and Pekka Malo. Bilevel optimization based on iterative approximation of multiple mappings. Journal of Heuristics , 26(2):151–185, 2020. ISSN 1572-9397. doi: 10.1007/s10732-019-09426-9. [40] Ankur Sinha and Vaseem Shaikh. Solving bilevel optimization problems using kriging approxima-tions. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , 52(10):10639–10654, 2021. [41] Jonathan F Bard. Practical bilevel optimization: algorithms and applications , volume 30. Springer Science & Business Media, 2013. [42] Stephan Dempe. Foundations of bilevel programming . Springer Science & Business Media, 2002. [43] Ankur Sinha and Satender Gunwal. A linear programming-based hyper local search for tuning hyperparameters. Operations Research Letters , 61:107287, 2025. [44] Barret Zoph and Quoc V Le. Neural architecture search with reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2017. [45] Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc V Le. Learning transferable architec-tures for scalable image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 8697–8710, 2018. [46] Hieu Pham, Melody Guan, Barret Zoph, Quoc Le, and Jeff Dean. Efficient neural architecture search via parameters sharing. In International conference on machine learning , pages 4095–4104. PMLR, 2018. [47] Bowen Baker, Otkrist Gupta, Nikhil Naik, and Ramesh Raskar. Designing neural network archi-tectures using reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.02167 , 2016. [48] Esteban Real, Sherry Moore, Andrew Selle, Saurabh Saxena, Yutaka Leon Suematsu, Jie Tan, Quoc V Le, and Alexey Kurakin. Large-scale evolution of image classifiers. In International conference on machine learning , pages 2902–2911. PMLR, 2017. [49] Renato Negrinho and Geoff Gordon. Deeparchitect: Automatically designing and training deep architectures. arXiv preprint arXiv:1704.08792 , 2017. [50] Esteban Real, Alok Aggarwal, Yanping Huang, and Quoc V Le. Regularized evolution for im-age classifier architecture search. In Proceedings of the aaai conference on artificial intelligence ,volume 33, pages 4780–4789, 2019. [51] Yuhui Xu, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng Zhang, Xin Chen, Guo-Jun Qi, Qi Tian, and Hongkai Xiong. PC-DARTS: Partial channel connections for memory-efficient architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.05737 , 2019. [52] Han Cai, Ligeng Zhu, and Song Han. Proxylessnas: Direct neural architecture search on target task and hardware. arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00332 , 2018. [53] Bichen Wu, Xiaoliang Dai, Peizhao Zhang, Yanghan Wang, Fei Sun, Yiming Wu, Yuandong Tian, Peter Vajda, Yangqing Jia, and Kurt Keutzer. Fbnet: Hardware-aware efficient convnet design via differentiable neural architecture search. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 10734–10742, 2019. 32 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. [54] Xin Chen, Lingxi Xie, Jun Wu, and Qi Tian. Progressive differentiable architecture search: Bridging the depth gap between search and evaluation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.12760 , 2019. [55] Arber Zela, Thomas Elsken, Tonmoy Saikia, Yassine Marrakchi, Thomas Brox, and Frank Hutter. Understanding and robustifying differentiable architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.09656 ,2019. [56] Xiangxiang Chu, Tianbao Zhou, Bo Zhang, and Jixiang Li. Fair DARTS: Eliminating unfair advantages in differentiable architecture search. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2020 , pages 465–480, Cham, 2020. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-030-58555-6. [57] Hanwen Liang, Shifeng Zhang, Jiacheng Sun, Xingqiu He, Weiran Huang, Kechen Zhuang, and Zhenguo Li. DARTS+: Improved differentiable architecture search with early stopping. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.06035 , 2019. [58] Huafeng Qin, Hongyu Zhu, Xin Jin, Xin Yu, Mounim A El-Yacoubi, and Xinbo Gao. EM-DARTS: Hierarchical differentiable architecture search for eye movement recognition. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.14432 , 2024. [59] Xiaoyu Han, Chenyu Li, Zifan Wang, and Guohua Liu. NDARTS: A differentiable architecture search based on the Neumann series. Algorithms , 16(12):536, 2023. [60] Zicheng Cai, Lei Chen, and Hai-Lin Liu. BHE-DARTS: Bilevel optimization based on hypergra-dient estimation for differentiable architecture search. In ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pages 1–5. IEEE, 2023. [61] Noha W Hasan, Ali S Saudi, Mahmoud I Khalil, and Hazem M Abbas. E-DARTS: Enhanced differ-entiable architecture search for acoustic scene classification. In 2021 16th International Conference on Computer Engineering and Systems (ICCES) , pages 1–6. IEEE, 2021. [62] Dong Pang, Xinyi Le, and Xinping Guan. RL-DARTS: Differentiable neural architecture search via reinforcement-learning-based meta-optimizer. Knowledge-Based Systems , 234:107585, 2021. [63] Zicheng Cai, Lei Chen, Tongtao Ling, and Hai-Lin Liu. STO-DARTS: Stochastic bilevel opti-mization for differentiable neural architecture search. IEEE Transactions on Emerging Topics in Computational Intelligence , 2024. [64] Xuanyang Zhang, Yonggang Li, Xiangyu Zhang, Yongtao Wang, and Jian Sun. Differentiable ar-chitecture search with random features. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pages 16060–16069, 2023. [65] Hongyu Zhu, Xin Jin, Hongchao Liao, Yan Xiang, Mounim A El-Yacoubi, and Huafeng Qin. Relax DARTS: Relaxing the constraints of differentiable architecture search for eye movement recognition. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.11652 , 2024. [66] Zhongnian Li, Yixin Xu, Peng Ying, Hu Chen, Renke Sun, and Xinzheng Xu. LMD-DARTS: Low-memory, densely connected, differentiable architecture search. Electronics , 13(14):2743, 2024. [67] Jiwoo Mun, Seokhyeon Ha, and Jungwoo Lee. DE-DARTS: Neural architecture search with dynamic exploration. ICT Express , 9(3):379–384, 2023. ISSN 2405-9595. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icte. 2022.04.005. [68] Kohei Nakai, Takashi Matsubara, and Kuniaki Uehara. Att-DARTS: Differentiable neural archi-tecture search for attention. In 2020 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN) ,pages 1–8, 2020. doi: 10.1109/IJCNN48605.2020.9207447. [69] Le Yang, Ziwei Zheng, Yizeng Han, Shiji Song, Gao Huang, and Fan Li. OStr-DARTS: Differentiable neural architecture search based on operation strength. IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics , 2024. [70] Bicheng Guo, Shibo He, Miaojing Shi, Kaicheng Yu, Jiming Chen, and Xuemin Shen. Semantic-DARTS: Elevating semantic learning for mobile differentiable architecture search. IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 2024. 33 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. [71] Minghao Chen, Houwen Peng, Jianlong Fu, and Haibin Ling. Autoformer: Searching transformers for visual recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision , pages 12270–12280, 2021. [72] Mingxing Tan, Bo Chen, Ruoming Pang, Vijay Vasudevan, Mark Sandler, Andrew Howard, and Quoc V Le. Mnasnet: Platform-aware neural architecture search for mobile. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 2820–2828, 2019. [73] Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural net-works. In International conference on machine learning , pages 6105–6114. PMLR, 2019. [74] Chris Ying, Aaron Klein, Eric Christiansen, Esteban Real, Kevin Murphy, and Frank Hutter. NAS-Bench-101: Towards reproducible neural architecture search. In International conference on machine learning , pages 7105–7114. PMLR, 2019. [75] Xuanyi Dong and Yi Yang. NAS-Bench-201: Extending the scope of reproducible neural architec-ture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.00326 , 2020. [76] Julien Siems, Lucas Zimmer, Arber Zela, Jovita Lukasik, Margret Keuper, and Frank Hutter. NAS-Bench-301 and the case for surrogate benchmarks for neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2008.09777 , 4:14, 2020. [77] Nikita Klyuchnikov, Ilya Trofimov, Ekaterina Artemova, Mikhail Salnikov, Maxim Fedorov, Alexan-der Filippov, and Evgeny Burnaev. NAS-Bench-NLP: neural architecture search benchmark for natural language processing. IEEE Access , 10:45736–45747, 2022. [78] Yijian Qin, Ziwei Zhang, Xin Wang, Zeyang Zhang, and Wenwu Zhu. Nas-bench-graph: Bench-marking graph neural architecture search. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35: 54–69, 2022. [79] Han Cai, Chuang Gan, Tianzhe Wang, Zhekai Zhang, and Song Han. Once-for-all: Train one network and specialize it for efficient deployment. arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.09791 , 2019. [80] Yang Gao, Hong Yang, Peng Zhang, Chuan Zhou, and Yue Hu. Graphnas: Graph neural architec-ture search with reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1904.09981 , 2019. [81] David Calhas, Vasco M Manquinho, and Ines Lynce. Automatic generation of neural architecture search spaces. In Combining Learning and Reasoning: Programming Languages, Formalisms, and Representations , 2021. [82] Mathieu Perrin, William Guicquero, Bruno Paille, and Gilles Sicard. Towards a configurable and non-hierarchical search space for nas. Neural Networks , 180:106700, 2024. [83] Hidenori Tanaka, Daniel Kunin, Daniel L Yamins, and Surya Ganguli. Pruning neural networks without any data by iteratively conserving synaptic flow. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:6377–6389, 2020. [84] Wuyang Chen, Xinyu Gong, and Zhangyang Wang. Neural architecture search on imagenet in four gpu hours: A theoretically inspired perspective. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.11535 , 2021. [85] Joe Mellor, Jack Turner, Amos Storkey, and Elliot J Crowley. Neural architecture search without training. In International conference on machine learning , pages 7588–7598. PMLR, 2021. [86] Neal Lawton, Anoop Kumar, Govind Thattai, Aram Galstyan, and Greg Ver Steeg. Neural archi-tecture search for parameter-efficient fine-tuning of large pre-trained language models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023 , pages 8506–8515, 2023. [87] Haiyang Sun, Zheng Lian, Licai Sun, Bin Liu, and Jianhua Tao. Rmnas: A multimodal neural architecture search framework for robust multimodal sentiment analysis. CoRR , 2023. [88] Mengwei Xu, Wangsong Yin, Dongqi Cai, Rongjie Yi, Daliang Xu, Qipeng Wang, Bingyang Wu, Yihao Zhao, Chen Yang, Shihe Wang, et al. A survey of resource-efficient llm and multimodal foundation models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.08092 , 2024. 34 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. [89] Zhe Li, Zhiwei Lin, and Yongtao Wang. Collm-nas: Collaborative large language models for efficient knowledge-guided neural architecture search. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.26037 , 2025. [90] Ruiyang Qin, Yuting Hu, Zheyu Yan, Jinjun Xiong, Ahmed Abbasi, and Yiyu Shi. Fl-nas: Towards fairness of nas for resource constrained devices via large language models. In 2024 29th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC) , pages 429–434. IEEE, 2024. [91] Jianhua Gao, Zeming Liu, Yizhuo Wang, and Weixing Ji. Ranas: Resource-aware neural architec-ture search for edge computing. ACM Transactions on Architecture and Code Optimization , 22(1): 1–18, 2025. [92] Junghyup Lee and Bumsub Ham. Az-nas: Assembling zero-cost proxies for network architecture search. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pages 5893–5903, 2024. [93] Kaicheng Yu, Rene Ranftl, and Mathieu Salzmann. How to train your super-net: An analysis of training heuristics in weight-sharing nas. arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.04276 , 2020. [94] Yiming Hu, Xingang Wang, Lujun Li, and Qingyi Gu. Improving one-shot nas with shrinking-and-expanding supernet. Pattern Recognition , 118:108025, 2021. [95] Yuqiao Liu, Yanan Sun, Bing Xue, Mengjie Zhang, Gary G Yen, and Kay Chen Tan. A survey on evolutionary neural architecture search. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems , 34(2):550–570, 2021. [96] Vyom Kumar Gupta, Suraj Kumar Lalwani, Gaurav Singh Bhati, Surya Prakash, et al. Bayesian optimization based neural architecture search for classification of gases/odors mixtures. IEEE Sensors Journal , 2024. [97] Sarwat Ali and M Arif Wani. Gradient-based neural architecture search: A comprehensive evalua-tion. Machine Learning and Knowledge Extraction , 5(3):1176–1194, 2023. [98] Miao Zhang, Huiqi Li, Shirui Pan, Xiaojun Chang, Chuan Zhou, Zongyuan Ge, and Steven Su. One-shot neural architecture search: Maximising diversity to overcome catastrophic forgetting. 

IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 43(9):2921–2935, 2020. [99] Babatounde Moctard Oloulade, Jianliang Gao, Jiamin Chen, Tengfei Lyu, and Raeed Al-Sabri. Graph neural architecture search: A survey. Tsinghua Science and Technology , 27(4):692–708, 2021. [100] Chenxi Liu, Liang-Chieh Chen, Florian Schroff, Hartwig Adam, Wei Hua, Alan L Yuille, and Li Fei-Fei. Auto-DeepLab: Hierarchical neural architecture search for semantic image segmentation. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pages 82–92, 2019. [101] Junwei Dong, Boyu Hou, Liang Feng, Huajin Tang, Kay Chen Tan, and Yew-Soon Ong. A cell-based fast memetic algorithm for automated convolutional neural architecture design. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , 34(11):9040–9053, 2022. [102] Lunchen Xie, Eugenio Lomurno, Matteo Gambella, Danilo Ardagna, Manuel Roveri, Matteo Mat-teucci, and Qingjiang Shi. A lightweight neural architecture search model for medical image clas-sification. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.03462 , 2024. [103] Yu Weng, Tianbao Zhou, Yujie Li, and Xiaoyu Qiu. NAS-Unet: Neural architecture search for medical image segmentation. IEEE access , 7:44247–44257, 2019. [104] Yan Wang, Liangli Zhen, Jianwei Zhang, Miqing Li, Lei Zhang, Zizhou Wang, Yangqin Feng, Yu Xue, Xiao Wang, Zheng Chen, et al. MedNAS: Multi-scale training-free neural architecture search for medical image analysis. IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , 2024. [105] Anthony Sarah, Sharath Nittur Sridhar, Maciej Szankin, and Sairam Sundaresan. LLaMA-NAS: Efficient neural architecture search for large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18377 ,2024. 35 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. [106] Krishna Teja Chitty-Venkata, Murali Emani, Venkatram Vishwanath, and Arun K Somani. Neural architecture search for transformers: A survey. IEEE access , 10:108374–108412, 2022. [107] Ting Li, Junbo Zhang, Kainan Bao, Yuxuan Liang, Yexin Li, and Yu Zheng. AutoST: Efficient neural architecture search for spatio-temporal prediction. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining , pages 794–802, 2020. [108] Barret Zoph, Vijay Vasudevan, Jonathon Shlens, and Quoc Le. Automl for large scale image classification and object detection. Google AI Blog , 2(2017), 2017. [109] Fanfei Meng, Chen-Ao Wang, and Alexander Brown. Evolution and efficiency in neural architec-ture search: Bridging the gap between expert design and automated optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17012 , 2024. [110] Michael Ogunsanya, Joan Isichei, and Salil Desai. Grid search hyperparameter tuning in additive manufacturing processes. Manufacturing Letters , 35:1031–1042, 2023. [111] Fathima M Dhilsath and S Justin Samuel. Hyperparameter tuning of ensemble classifiers using grid search and random search for prediction of heart disease. Computational Intelligence and Healthcare Informatics , pages 139–158, 2021. [112] Pier Paolo Ippolito. Hyperparameter tuning: the art of fine-tuning machine and deep learning models to improve metric results. In Applied data science in tourism: Interdisciplinary approaches, methodologies, and applications , pages 231–251. Springer, 2022. [113] BH Shekar and Guesh Dagnew. Grid search-based hyperparameter tuning and classification of microarray cancer data. In 2019 second international conference on advanced computational and communication paradigms (ICACCP) , pages 1–8. IEEE, 2019. [114] James Bergstra and Yoshua Bengio. Random search for hyper-parameter optimization. The journal of machine learning research , 13(1):281–305, 2012. [115] James Bergstra, R´ emi Bardenet, Yoshua Bengio, and Bal´ azs K´ egl. Algorithms for hyper-parameter optimization. Advances in neural information processing systems , 24, 2011. [116] Katharina Eggensperger, Matthias Feurer, Frank Hutter, James Bergstra, Jasper Snoek, Holger Hoos, Kevin Leyton-Brown, et al. Towards an empirical foundation for assessing bayesian opti-mization of hyperparameters. In NIPS workshop on Bayesian Optimization in Theory and Practice ,volume 10, pages 1–5, 2013. [117] Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P Adams. Practical bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms. Advances in neural information processing systems , 25, 2012. [118] Aaron Klein, Stefan Falkner, Simon Bartels, Philipp Hennig, and Frank Hutter. Fast bayesian optimization of machine learning hyperparameters on large datasets. In Artificial intelligence and statistics , pages 528–536. PMLR, 2017. [119] Pablo Ribalta Lorenzo, Jakub Nalepa, Michal Kawulok, Luciano Sanchez Ramos, and Jos´ e Ranilla Pastor. Particle swarm optimization for hyper-parameter selection in deep neural networks. In 

Proceedings of the genetic and evolutionary computation conference , pages 481–488, 2017. [120] Masanori Suganuma, Shinichi Shirakawa, and Tomoharu Nagao. A genetic programming approach to designing convolutional neural network architectures. In Proceedings of the genetic and evolu-tionary computation conference , pages 497–504, 2017. [121] Yu Guo, Jian-Yu Li, and Zhi-Hui Zhan. Efficient hyperparameter optimization for convolution neural networks in deep learning: A distributed particle swarm optimization approach. Cybernetics and Systems , 52(1):36–57, 2020. [122] Yanyan Fan, Yu Zhang, Baosu Guo, Xiaoyuan Luo, Qingjin Peng, and Zhenlin Jin. A hybrid sparrow search algorithm of the hyperparameter optimization in deep learning. Mathematics , 10 (16):3019, 2022. 36 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. [123] Zhichao Lu, Ian Whalen, Vishnu Boddeti, Yashesh Dhebar, Kalyanmoy Deb, Erik Goodman, and Wolfgang Banzhaf. Nsga-net: neural architecture search using multi-objective genetic algorithm. In Proceedings of the genetic and evolutionary computation conference , pages 419–427, 2019. [124] Thomas Elsken, Jan Hendrik Metzen, and Frank Hutter. Efficient multi-objective neural architec-ture search via lamarckian evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:1804.09081 , 2018. [125] Yu Xue, Chen Chen, and Adam Slowik. Neural architecture search based on a multi-objective evolutionary algorithm with probability stack. IEEE transactions on evolutionary computation , 27 (4):778–786, 2023. [126] Zhichao Lu, Kalyanmoy Deb, Erik Goodman, Wolfgang Banzhaf, and Vishnu Naresh Boddeti. Nsganetv2: Evolutionary multi-objective surrogate-assisted neural architecture search. In European conference on computer vision , pages 35–51. Springer, 2020. [127] Lyuyang Tong and Bo Du. Neural architecture search via reference point based multi-objective evolutionary algorithm. Pattern Recognition , 132:108962, 2022. [128] Xiangxiang Chu, Bo Zhang, and Ruijun Xu. Multi-objective reinforced evolution in mobile neural architecture search. In european conference on computer vision , pages 99–113. Springer, 2020. [129] Aditya Mohan, Carolin Benjamins, Konrad Wienecke, Alexander Dockhorn, and Marius Lindauer. Autorl hyperparameter landscapes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02396 , 2023. [130] Chi-Hung Hsu, Shu-Huan Chang, Jhao-Hong Liang, Hsin-Ping Chou, Chun-Hao Liu, Shih-Chieh Chang, Jia-Yu Pan, Yu-Ting Chen, Wei Wei, and Da-Cheng Juan. Monas: Multi-objective neural architecture search using reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.10332 , 2018. [131] Akshay Mehra and Jihun Hamm. Penalty method for inversion-free deep bilevel optimization. In 

Asian conference on machine learning , pages 347–362. PMLR, 2021. [132] Jonathan Lorraine and David Duvenaud. Stochastic hyperparameter optimization through hyper-networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.09419 , 2018. [133] Wanli Shi and Bin Gu. Improved penalty method via doubly stochastic gradients for bilevel hyperpa-rameter optimization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 35, pages 9621–9629, 2021. [134] Matthew MacKay, Paul Vicol, Jon Lorraine, David Duvenaud, and Roger Grosse. Self-tuning networks: Bilevel optimization of hyperparameters using structured best-response functions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.03088 , 2019. [135] Dougal Maclaurin, David Duvenaud, and Ryan Adams. Gradient-based hyperparameter optimiza-tion through reversible learning. In International conference on machine learning , pages 2113–2122. PMLR, 2015. [136] Haichao Zhang, Kuangrong Hao, Lei Gao, Xue-song Tang, and Bing Wei. Enhanced gradient for differentiable architecture search. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems ,2023. [137] Jie Li, Yuxia Wang, Yifan Wang, Ruiyun Yu, and Xingwei Wang. HN-DARTS: Hybrid network differentiable architecture search for industrial scenarios. In Pacific Rim International Conference on Artificial Intelligence , pages 322–327. Springer, 2024. [138] Abhishek Shukla, Ankur Sinha, and Faiz Hamid. AP-NAS: An auxiliary program framework for neural architecture search. Working paper, 2026. [139] Abhishek Shukla, Ankur Sinha, and Faiz Hamid. Designing compact neural architectures via neuron gating and mixed activation. Working paper, 2026. [140] Abhishek Shukla, Anikeit Khanna, Ankur Sinha, and Faiz Hamid. LiFT: Local search via linear programming for overfitting-controlled transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.16243 , 2026. 37 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

# Appendix 

# A Synthetic Dataset for Overfitting Illustration 

This appendix provides the complete dataset used to create Figure 1 which illustrates the effect of model complexity on overfitting behavior in neural networks. The dataset is two-dimensional and synthetically constructed to enable clear visualization of classification boundaries. Each data point consists of an input vector x = ( x1, x 2) ∈ R2 and a corresponding binary label y ∈ { 0, 1}. We define the training and validation datasets respectively as, 

ST = { (xTi , y Ti ) }38 

> i=1

, SV = { (xVi , y Vi ) }18 

> i=1

where ST and SV are used for model training and validation respectively. The complete training dataset is given by 

ST = { (( −0.25 , 0.05) , 0) , (( −0.85 , −0.65) , 0) , (( −0.80 , 0.15) , 0) , (( −0.75 , −0.75) , 0) , (( −0.65 , 0.50) , 0) ,

(( −0.60 , −0.20) , 0) , (( −0.15 , 0.75) , 0) , ((0 .35 , −0.85) , 0) , ((0 .50 , 0.60) , 0) , ((0 .80 , 0.40) , 0) ,

((0 .70 , −0.60) , 0) , ((0 .90 , 0.40) , 0) , ((0 .95 , −0.30) , 0) , ((0 .075 , −0.01) , 0) , ((0 .25 , 0.05) , 0) ,

((0 .10 , −0.125) , 0) , ((0 .30 , 0.025) , 0) , ((0 .00 , 0.10) , 0) ,

(( −0.85 , −0.40) , 1) , (( −0.70 , 0.70) , 1) , (( −0.55 , −0.90) , 1) , (( −0.50 , 0.20) , 1) , (( −0.40 , −0.55) , 1) ,

(( −0.30 , 0.90) , 1) , ((0 .15 , −0.75) , 1) , ((0 .30 , 0.85) , 1) , ((0 .45 , −0.40) , 1) , ((0 .65 , 0.20) , 1) ,

((0 .80 , −0.70) , 1) , ((0 .85 , 0.60) , 1) , (( −0.65 , 0.10) , 1) , ((0 .15 , −0.40) , 1) , ((0 .90 , 0.90) , 1) ,

((0 .15 , −0.15) , 1) , ((0 .35 , 0.00) , 1) , (( −0.10 , 0.10) , 1) , ((0 .05 , −0.20) , 1) , ((0 .25 , 0.20) , 1) }

The validation dataset, used to monitor generalization performance, is given as 

SV = { (( −0.10 , 0.30) , 0) , (( −0.85 , −0.05) , 0) , (( −0.70 , 0.40) , 0) , (( −0.55 , −0.65) , 0) , ((0 .25 , 0.55) , 0) ,

((0 .40 , 0.40) , 0) , ((0 .50 , −0.35) , 0) , ((0 .65 , 0.10) , 0) , (( −0.30 , −0.15) , 0) ,

(( −0.50 , −0.75) , 1) , (( −0.40 , 0.50) , 1) , ((0 .35 , −0.60) , 1) , ((0 .70 , 0.25) , 1) , ((0 .80 , 0.30) , 1) ,

((0 .50 , −0.20) , 1) , ((0 .10 , −0.65) , 1) , ((0 .00 , −0.55) , 1) , (( −0.70 , −0.05) , 1) }

# B Toll-Setting Problem 

Imagine a government or a private highway operator who wants to decide how much toll to charge for using a highway. The goal is to earn as much revenue as possible. However, if the toll is set too high, people may avoid using the tolled highway, leading to reduced revenue. On the other hand, if the toll is too low, many travelers may use it, but the revenue collected per traveler would be small. Hence, the toll must strike a balance between the toll rate and the number of users. Crucially, the government can not make this decision in isolation, it must account for how users will react to different toll rates. Users are interested in minimizing their own total cost, which depends on travel time, toll, and other monetary expenses. This naturally leads to a BOP, where the upper-level optimization represents the government’s task of setting the toll rate to maximize revenue, and the lower-level decision corresponds to users’ route choices for a given toll rate, i.e., selecting the fraction of distance on each route to minimize their travel cost. 

Parameters and Decision Variables. Consider a simplified transportation network between origin A

and destination B, connected by two parallel highways of normalized distance 1. A traveler may choose to travel a fraction y ∈ Y = [0 , 1] of the distance on the tolled highway and (1 − y) on the free highway. Switching between highways is usually possible at certain fixed locations along the route. If there are 

n equally spaced switching points (including A and B), then the set of feasible switching locations is 

S =

n

0, 1 

> n−1

, 2 

> n−1

, . . . , 1

o

. In the unrestricted case (switching possible everywhere), S = [0 , 1]. We assume that there is no cost involved in the switching process. The two participants in this decision process are: 

Leader (Government/Operator): Chooses the toll rate τ ≥ 0 to maximize revenue 

Follower (Users): Choose y ∈ Y to minimize their own total cost. 38 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. Table 13: Parameters and decision variables in the toll-setting problem. 

Symbol Description 

τ Toll per unit distance (decision variable of the leader) 

y Fraction of distance traveled on the tolled highway (decision variable of the follower) 

a Travel time per unit distance on the tolled highway 

b Travel time per unit distance on the free highway 

c Intrinsic (non-toll) cost per unit distance on the tolled highway 

d Cost per unit distance on the free highway 

w1 Weight given to travel time in the user’s generalized cost 

w2 Weight given to monetary cost in the user’s generalized cost The parameters and decision variables for the problem are given in Table 13. 

Lower-Level Problem. The total travel time and monetary cost are linear functions of y, given as follows 

T (y) = ay + b(1 − y) = ( a − b)y + b, C(y, τ ) = ( c + τ )y + d(1 − y) = ( c + τ − d)y + d (16) The user evaluates a generalized cost that combines time and money 

G(y, τ ) = w1

(a − b)y + b2 + w2

(c + τ − d)y + d2 (17) Given a toll τ , the user solves min  

> y∈Y

G(y, τ ) (18) This is a convex optimization problem in y.

Upper-Level Problem. Anticipating the user’s optimal reaction ˆ y(τ ), the operator seeks to maximize toll revenue as follows max   

> τ≥0

R(τ ) = τ · ˆy(τ ) (19) 

Bilevel Formulation. The entire problem can be written compactly as max   

> τ≥0

τ · ˆy subject to 



ˆy ∈ argmin 

> y∈Y

G(y, τ ) (20) 

Interpretation. Formulation (20) clearly demonstrates the hierarchical dependency characteristic of bilevel optimization. In this framework, the lower-level problem models the users’ equilibrium behavior, where each user selects the route that minimizes their perceived travel cost. The upper-level problem, on the other hand, represents the leader’s objective of maximizing total revenue while anticipating the users’ optimal reactions to the toll rate τ . This interdependence between decision layers is what imparts the hierarchical nature to the problem. Although the lower-level problem is convex, ensuring that users’ route choices are uniquely determined, the resulting upper-level objective, R(τ ) = τ ˆy(τ ), is typically non-convex. The nonlinearity and piecewise smoothness of the follower’s best-response mapping ˆ y(τ ), arising from the argmin operator, make the leader’s optimization landscape inherently challenging. Hence, convexity at the lower-level does not guarantee overall tractability at the upper-level. To explore the interplay between the leader and follower decisions, we first analyze the follower’s optimization problem, where the goal is to determine the optimal traffic split y minimizing the generalized travel cost for a fixed toll τ . The leader then seeks the toll rate that maximizes total revenue by anticipating this equilibrium response. To demonstrate the system’s behavior under varying conditions, three representative parameter settings, each reflecting a distinct operational regime, are analyzed. The corresponding optimal solutions are reported in Table 14, with detailed analytical derivations presented as follows. 39 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

B.1 The Follower’s Response: A Convex Quadratic Problem 

The follower’s objective is to solve ˆy(τ ) ∈ argmin 

> y

n

G(y, τ ) 0 ≤ y ≤ 1

o

,

where the generalized cost G(y, τ ) from (17) is a quadratic function of the decision variable y. Let’s expand this function to make its structure clear. Assuming weights w1 = w2 = 1 

G(y, τ ) =  ay + b(1 − y)2 +  (c + τ )y + d(1 − y)2

=  (a − b)y + b2 +  (c + τ − d)y + d2

= (a − b)2 + ( c + τ − d)2| {z } 

> A(τ)

y2 + [2 b(a − b) + 2 d(c + τ − d)] 

| {z } 

> B(τ)

y + b2 + d2| {z }

> const

The problem is thus a convex quadratic program, min y∈[0 ,1] A(τ )y2 + B(τ )y, whose solution is unique. The unconstrained minimizer of this quadratic can be found by setting the derivative with respect to y

to zero: 2 A(τ )y + B(τ ) = 0. This gives 

yunc (τ ) = − B(τ )2A(τ ) (21) However, the follower’s choice y is constrained to the interval [0 , 1]. The optimal solution ˆ y(τ ) is therefore the projection of the unconstrained minimizer onto this interval. This can be derived from the KKT conditions discussed next. 

B.2 Derivation of the Follower’s Response via KKT Conditions 

To apply the KKT conditions, we first state the problem in standard form. Let f (y) = A(τ )y2 + B(τ )y.The constraints are g1(y) = −y ≤ 0 and g2(y) = y − 1 ≤ 0. The Lagrangian is 

L(y, μ 1, μ 2) = f (y) + μ1g1(y) + μ2g2(y) = A(τ )y2 + B(τ )y − μ1y + μ2(y − 1) ,

where μ1, μ 2 ≥ 0 are the KKT multipliers. The KKT conditions for a minimum are (stationarity) ∂L

∂y = 2 A(τ )y + B(τ ) − μ1 + μ2 = 0 ,

(primal feasibility) 0 ≤ y ≤ 1,

(dual feasibility) μ1 ≥ 0, μ2 ≥ 0,

(complementarity) μ1y = 0 , μ2(y − 1) = 0 We analyze the solution by considering which constraints are active. 

• Interior Solution ( 0 < ˆy < 1). Since y̸ = 0 and y − 1̸ = 0, complementary slackness requires 

μ1 = 0 and μ2 = 0. The stationarity condition simplifies to 2A(τ )ˆ y + B(τ ) = 0 = ⇒ ˆy = − B(τ )2A(τ ) = yunc (τ )This solution is valid if and only if it satisfies the case’s assumption, i.e., 0 < y unc (τ ) < 1. 

• Boundary Solution ( ˆy = 0 ). The condition y = 0 is active. Complementary slackness requires 

μ2(0 − 1) = 0 = ⇒ μ2 = 0. The stationarity condition becomes 2A(τ )(0) + B(τ ) − μ1 + 0 = 0 = ⇒ μ1 = B(τ )For dual feasibility, we must have μ1 ≥ 0, which means B(τ ) ≥ 0. Since A(τ ) > 0, the condition 

B(τ ) ≥ 0 is equivalent to − B(τ )2A(τ ) ≤ 0, or yunc (τ ) ≤ 0. Thus, ˆ y = 0 is the solution if yunc (τ ) ≤ 0. 40 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

• Boundary Solution ( ˆy = 1 ). The condition y = 1 is active. Complementary slackness requires 

μ1(1) = 0 = ⇒ μ1 = 0. The stationarity condition becomes 2A(τ )(1) + B(τ ) − 0 + μ2 = 0 = ⇒ μ2 = −2A(τ ) − B(τ )For dual feasibility, we must have μ2 ≥ 0, which means −2A(τ ) − B(τ ) ≥ 0, or B(τ ) ≤ − 2A(τ ). Dividing by 2 A(τ ) (which is positive) gives B(τ )2A(τ ) ≤ − 1. Multiplying by −1 and reversing the inequality gives − B(τ )2A(τ ) ≥ 1, which is yunc (τ ) ≥ 1. Thus, ˆ y = 1 is the solution if yunc (τ ) ≥ 1. Combining the above three scenarios, we get the lower-level optimal response as follows ˆy(τ ) = 



0 if yunc (τ ) ≤ 01 if yunc (τ ) ≥ 1

yunc (τ ) if 0 < y unc (τ ) < 1(22) This can be written more compactly as ˆy(τ ) = min  1, max { 0, y unc (τ ) } (23) For the interior case where 0 < ˆy(τ ) < 1, the closed-form solution is ˆy(τ ) = − B(τ )2A(τ ) = b(b − a) + d(d − c − τ )(a − b)2 + ( c + τ − d)2 (24) 

B.3 Three Canonical Regimes (Worked Cases) 

To understand the interplay between the leader and follower, we analyze three parameter sets ( a, b, c, d )that exhibit distinct follower responses. 

• Case 1: Never Tolled (Avoidance). Consider parameters ( a, b, c, d ) = (2 , 1, 3, 1). Here, the tolled route is inherently less attractive (slower travel time and higher base cost). Let’s derive the follower’s response. 

A(τ ) = (2 − 1) 2 + (3 + τ − 1) 2 = 1 + ( τ + 2) 2 = τ 2 + 4 τ + 5 

B(τ ) = 2(1)(2 − 1) + 2(1)(3 + τ − 1) = 2 + 2( τ + 2) = 2 τ + 6 The unconstrained minimizer is 

yunc (τ ) = − B(τ )2A(τ ) = − 2τ + 6 2( τ 2 + 4 τ + 5) = − τ + 3 

τ 2 + 4 τ + 5 For any non-negative toll ( τ ≥ 0), the numerator is positive and the denominator is positive. Therefore, yunc (τ ) < 0 for all τ ≥ 0. According to (22), the follower’s best response is always to be at the lower boundary ˆy(τ ) = 0 ∀τ ≥ 0Consequently, the leader’s revenue is R(τ ) = τ · 0 = 0. The leader cannot extract any revenue. 

• Case 2: Always Tolled up to a Threshold. Consider parameters ( a, b, c, d ) = (1 , 3, 1, 3). In this case, the tolled route is far superior (faster and cheaper). 

A(τ ) = (1 − 3) 2 + (1 + τ − 3) 2 = 4 + ( τ − 2) 2 = τ 2 − 4τ + 8 

B(τ ) = 2(3)(1 − 3) + 2(3)(1 + τ − 3) = −12 + 6( τ − 2) = 6 τ − 24 The unconstrained minimizer is 

yunc (τ ) = − B(τ )2A(τ ) = − 6τ − 24 2( τ 2 − 4τ + 8) = 12 − 3ττ 2 − 4τ + 8 The follower will use the tolled route exclusively (ˆ y = 1) as long as the unconstrained solution, 

yunc (τ ) ≥ 1. We find the threshold toll τth by solving yunc (τth ) = 1 12 − 3τth 

τ 2 

> th

− 4τth + 8 = 1 12 − 3τth = τ 2 

> th

− 4τth + 8 0 = τ 2 

> th

− τth − 441 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. The positive root of this quadratic is τth = 1+ √1−4(1)( −4) 2 = 1+ √17 2 ≈ 2.56. For 0 ≤ τ ≤ τth , we have yunc (τ ) ≥ 1, so the follower’s response is ˆ y(τ ) = 1. In this regime, the leader’s revenue is 

R(τ ) = τ . To maximize this, the leader should choose the largest possible toll, pushing it to the threshold value: τ ⋆ = τth ≈ 2.56. At this point, revenue is R⋆ ≈ 2.56. If τ > τ th , usage begins to drop according to the interior solution. 

Figure 19: Follower’s response and leader revenue across three regimes in the toll-setting bilevel model. 

Analysis for Tolls above the Threshold ( τ > τ th ): To confirm that τth is the global optimum, we must analyze the leader’s revenue when the toll is set higher than this threshold. For 

τ > τ th ≈ 2.56, the unconstrained response yunc (τ ) will be less than 1. We must also check where it becomes non-positive by setting the numerator to zero: 12 − 3τ = 0 = ⇒ τ = 4. This defines two sub-regions for τ > τ th .

Interior Solution Region ( τth < τ < 4). In this range, 0 < y unc (τ ) < 1. The follower’s response is the interior solution ˆy(τ ) = yunc (τ ) = 12 − 3ττ 2 − 4τ + 8 The leader’s revenue function is 

R(τ ) = τ · ˆy(τ ) = 12 τ − 3τ 2

τ 2 − 4τ + 8 Computing the derivative dR dτ using the quotient rule. Let N (τ ) = 12 τ − 3τ 2 and D(τ ) = 

τ 2 − 4τ + 8 

dR dτ = N ′(τ )D(τ ) − N (τ )D′(τ )[D(τ )] 2 = (12 − 6τ )( τ 2 − 4τ + 8) − (12 τ − 3τ 2)(2 τ − 4) (τ 2 − 4τ + 8) 2

42 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. The sign of the derivative is determined by its numerator, which simplifies to Num( τ ) = ( −6τ 3 + 36 τ 2 − 96 τ + 96) − (−6τ 3 + 36 τ 2 − 48 τ )= −96 τ + 96 + 48 τ

= 96 − 48 τ = 48(2 − τ )The derivative is zero when 48(2 − τ ) = 0, which implies τ = 2. This stationary point is outside the region of interest ( τ > 2.56). For any τ in the interval ( τth , 4), the term (2 − τ ) is negative. Therefore, dR dτ < 0 throughout this entire region. This proves that the revenue function is strictly decreasing for all tolls immediately following the threshold. 

Zero Usage Region ( τ ≥ 4). In this range, yunc (τ ) ≤ 0. The follower’s response becomes ˆy(τ ) = 0. Consequently, the leader’s revenue is R(τ ) = 0. 

• Case 3: Interior Split (Partial Usage). Consider parameters ( a, b, c, d ) = (1 , 2, 2, 1), where neither route strictly dominates the other. The coefficients of the follower’s quadratic cost function are 

A(τ ) = (1 − 2) 2 + (2 + τ − 1) 2 = 1 + ( τ + 1) 2 = τ 2 + 2 τ + 2 

B(τ ) = 2(2)(1 − 2) + 2(1)(2 + τ − 1) = −4 + 2( τ + 1) = 2 τ − 2The unconstrained minimizer is 

yunc (τ ) = − B(τ )2A(τ ) = − 2τ − 22( τ 2 + 2 τ + 2) = 1 − ττ 2 + 2 τ + 2 For any toll τ ∈ [0 , 1], the numerator (1 − τ ) is in [0 , 1] and the denominator is ≥ 2. Thus, we have 0 ≤ yunc (τ ) ≤ 1/2. This confirms that for this range of tolls, the follower’s optimal response is always an interior solution, ˆ y(τ ) = yunc (τ )ˆy(τ ) = 1 − ττ 2 + 2 τ + 2 , for τ ∈ [0 , 1] (25) The leader’s problem is to maximize the revenue function R(τ ) = τ ˆy(τ ) over the feasible interval for τ

max  

> τ

R(τ ) = τ (1 − τ )

τ 2 + 2 τ + 2 subject to τ ≥ 0

τ ≤ 1This is a constrained non-linear optimization problem. We solve it using the KKT conditions. First, we write the constraints in the standard form gi(τ ) ≤ 0

g1(τ ) = −τ ≤ 0

g2(τ ) = τ − 1 ≤ 0The Lagrangian function L for this maximization problem is 

L(τ, λ 1, λ 2) = R(τ ) − λ1(−τ ) − λ2(τ − 1) = R(τ ) + λ1τ + λ2(1 − τ ),

where λ1, λ 2 are the non-negative Lagrange multipliers. The KKT conditions for an optimal solution 

τ ⋆ are (stationarity) ∂L

∂τ τ ⋆ = dR dτ τ ⋆ + λ1 − λ2 = 0 ,

(primal feasibility) 0 ≤ τ ⋆ ≤ 1,

(dual feasibility) λ1 ≥ 0, λ2 ≥ 0,

(complementarity) λ1(−τ ⋆) = 0 , λ2(τ ⋆ − 1) = 0 The derivative of the revenue function using the quotient rule, where N (τ ) = τ − τ 2 and D(τ ) = 

τ 2 + 2 τ + 2 is given as 

dR dτ = N ′(τ )D(τ ) − N (τ )D′(τ )[D(τ )] 2 = (1 − 2τ )( τ 2 + 2 τ + 2) − (τ − τ 2)(2 τ + 2) (τ 2 + 2 τ + 2) 2

dR dτ = −3τ 2 − 4τ + 2 (τ 2 + 2 τ + 2) 2

We now analyze the possible cases based on which constraints are active. 43 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

Interior solution ( 0 < τ ⋆ < 1): From complementary slackness, since τ ⋆̸ = 0 and τ ⋆ − 1̸ = 0, we must have λ1 = 0 and λ2 = 0. The stationarity condition simplifies to dR dτ = 0. This requires the numerator to be zero 

−3( τ ⋆)2 − 4τ ⋆ + 2 = 0 =⇒ 3( τ ⋆)2 + 4 τ ⋆ − 2 = 0 The solutions are τ = −4±√16 −4(3)( −2) 6 = −4±√40 6 . The only positive root is 

τ ⋆ = −4 + √40 6 = −2 + √10 3 ≈ 0.387 This value lies within the interval (0 , 1), satisfying the primal feasibility assumption for an interior solution. Thus, τ ⋆ ≈ 0.387 with λ1 = λ2 = 0 is a valid KKT point. 

Boundary solution at τ ⋆ = 0 : The constraint g1(τ ) is active. From complementary slackness, 

λ2(τ ⋆ − 1) = λ2(−1) = 0 =⇒ λ2 = 0. The stationarity condition becomes dR dτ τ =0 

+ λ1 = 0. Let’s evaluate the derivative at τ = 0 

dR dτ τ =0 

= −3(0) 2 − 4(0) + 2 (0 2 + 2(0) + 2) 2 = 24 = 12The stationarity condition thus requires 12 + λ1 = 0 =⇒ λ1 = −1/2. This violates the dual feasibility condition λ1 ≥ 0. Therefore, τ ⋆ = 0 is not the maximum. 

Boundary solution at τ ⋆ = 1 : The constraint g2(τ ) is active. From complementary slackness, 

λ1(−τ ⋆) = λ1(−1) = 0 =⇒ λ1 = 0. The stationarity condition becomes dR dτ τ =1 

− λ2 = 0. Evaluating the derivative at τ = 1 

dR dτ τ =1 

= −3(1) 2 − 4(1) + 2 (1 2 + 2(1) + 2) 2 = −525 = − 15The stationarity condition requires − 15 − λ2 = 0 =⇒ λ2 = −1/5. This violates the dual feasibility condition λ2 ≥ 0. Therefore, τ ⋆ = 1 is not the maximum. The only solution satisfying all KKT conditions is the interior point. The optimal toll is therefore 

τ ⋆ ≈ 0.387. At this toll, the follower’s usage and the leader’s revenue are 

y⋆(τ ⋆) ≈ 1 − 0.387 (0 .387) 2 + 2(0 .387) + 2 ≈ 0.613 2.924 ≈ 0.21 

R(τ ⋆) = τ ⋆y⋆(τ ⋆) ≈ 0.387 × 0.21 ≈ 0.081 For any toll τ > 1, the tolled route becomes economically unattractive ( yunc (τ ) < 0), and the fol-lower’s optimal response is to completely avoid it, resulting in zero usage (ˆ y(τ ) = 0). Consequently, the leader’s revenue R(τ ) is also zero, making any such toll a suboptimal choice compared to the interior solution. The solutions of the toll-setting problem for different parameter regimes are given in Table 14. The phase diagram given by Figure 19 depicts a dominated tolled route (never use), a dominant tolled route (always use up to a threshold), and comparable routes (interior split). They illustrate how the leader’s non-convex objective arises from the follower’s simple, convex optimal response function. 

Remarks. The convexity of the follower’s problem guarantees a unique equilibrium response ˆ y(τ ) for each admissible toll rate. However, the leader’s objective remains non-convex and piecewise due to discontinuities introduced by the follower’s best-response mapping. Consequently, optimal toll values may occur either at the boundary cases, where the user fully commits to one route (ˆ y ∈ { 0, 1}), or within the interior, where mixed choices emerge. This structural property is emblematic of many bilevel formulations encountered in practice, such as pricing, resource allocation, and hyperparameter optimization, where the leader must anticipate rational but constrained follower behavior. These interactions often yield non-smooth optimization landscapes that require specialized analytical and computational treatment. 44 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. Table 14: Optimal tolls, user’s optimal responses, and maximum revenues in different regimes of the toll-setting problem. 

Regime Type Optimal Solutions and Objective Values 

Interior Split (Partial Usage) Parameters: ( a, b, c, d ) = (1 , 2, 2, 1) Optimal toll: τ ⋆ = −2+ √10 3 ≈ 0.39 Follower’s optimal response: y∗ =≈ 0.21 Leader’s maximum revenue: R⋆ ≈ 0.08 Never Tolled (Avoidance) Parameters: ( a, b, c, d ) = (2 , 1, 3, 1) Follower’s optimal response: y∗ = 0 Optimal toll: τ ⋆ = arbitrary (any τ ≥ 0) Leader’s maximum revenue: R⋆ = 0 Always Tolled up to a Threshold Parameters: ( a, b, c, d ) = (1 , 3, 1, 3) Threshold toll: τth ≈ 2.56 Optimal toll: τ ⋆ ≈ 2.56 Follower’s optimal response: y∗ = 1 Leader’s maximum revenue: R⋆ ≈ 2.56 

# C Real and Standard Formulations 

The real and standard formulations for the optimistic bilevel problem are described as follows. Their differences are illustrated using a simple example. Similar descriptions can be developed for the pessimistic bilevel problem. Consider the reaction set defined as Ψ( x) = 



ˆy : ˆy ∈ argmin 

> y

{f (x, y ) | g(x, y ) ≤ 0, h (x, y ) = 0 }



Real Optimistic Formulation: The real optimistic formulation is conceptually more appropriate be-cause, from the perspective of the upper-level decision maker, the value of the objective function is of primary importance rather than the explicit attainment of a particular lower-level solution within the reaction set. It is defined as follows min  

> x

inf  

> ˆy∈Ψ( x)

F (x, ˆy) subject to G(x, ˆy) ≤ 0, H (x, ˆy) = 0 (26) 

Standard Optimistic Formulation: The standard optimistic formulation is more tractable. It is equivalent to the real optimistic formulation in the case where the infimum in the inner mini-mization problem of formulation (26) is attained. The standard optimistic formulation is defined as follows min  

> x, ˆy

F (x, ˆy) subject to ˆy ∈ Ψ( x), G (x, ˆy) ≤ 0, H (x, ˆy) = 0 (27) 

Example: Consider the following bilevel problem “min”  

> x

F (x, ˆy) = −ˆy subject to ˆy ∈ argmin 

> y

{x − y | 0 ≤ y < x }, x ∈ [0 , 1] (28) The lower-level problem is given by min 

> 0≤y<x

(x − y),

which is equivalent to maximizing y over the interval [0 , x ). The supremum of y is x, but it is not attained due to the strict inequality. Hence, the reaction set is Ψ( x) = [0 , x ). 

Standard Optimistic Formulation. The problem can be written as min  

> x, ˆy

−ˆy subject to ˆy ∈ [0 , x ), x ∈ [0 , 1] (29) 45 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. For any fixed x, the objective is minimized by choosing ˆ y as large as possible, i.e., ˆ y → x−. This yields an infimum value of −x, which is not attainable since ˆ y̸ = x. Consequently, the overall infimum of the problem is −1, obtained as x → 1 and ˆ y → 1−, but no feasible solution attains this value. Therefore, the standard optimistic formulation does not admit an optimal solution. 

Real Optimistic Formulation. The corresponding real optimistic formulation is min  

> x∈[0 ,1]

inf 

> ˆy∈Ψ( x)

(−ˆy) (30) Substituting Ψ( x) = [0 , x ), we obtain inf 

> ˆy∈[0 ,x )

(−ˆy) = −x

Thus, the problem reduces to min 

> x∈[0 ,1]

(−x),

which admits the optimal solution x∗ = 1 with optimal value −1. 

Discussion. This example highlights a fundamental difference between the two formulations. The standard optimistic formulation requires the explicit selection of a lower-level optimal solution, which may fail when the lower-level optimum is not attained. In contrast, the real optimistic formulation relies on the infimum over the reaction set and remains well-defined even in the absence of an attained lower-level solution. Consequently, the real formulation admits an optimal solution in this example, whereas the standard formulation does not. 

# D Solutions under Optimistic and Pessimistic Formulations 

Recall the bilevel formulation “min”  

> x

F (x, ˆy) = x2 + ˆ y2 + ˆ y − x + 12

s.t. 

− 1 ≤ x ≤ 1,

− x + ˆ y ≤ 1,x − ˆy ≤ 1,

ˆy ∈ argmin 

> y

n

f (x, y ) = ( y − x)4 − (y − x)2 s.t. x2 + y2 ≤ 1, x + y ≤ 1

o

Figure 20 visualizes the lower-level objective function corresponding to a fixed upper-level decision (x = 0). The plot illustrates the minima ˆ y = ± 1√2 of the lower-level function, which are used to derive the reaction set in the context of bilevel optimization. To analyze the follower’s behavior, we construct the Lagrangian of the lower-level problem 

L(x, y, λ 1, λ 2) = ( y − x)4 − (y − x)2 + λ1(x2 + y2 − 1) + λ2(x + y − 1) ,

where λ1, λ 2 ≥ 0 are the multipliers associated with the follower constraints. The KKT conditions are (stationarity) 4( y − x)3 − 2( y − x) + 2 λ1y + λ2 = 0 ,

(primal feasibility) x2 + y2 ≤ 1, x + y ≤ 1,

(dual feasibility) λ1 ≥ 0, λ2 ≥ 0,

(complementarity) λ1(x2 + y2 − 1) = 0 , λ2(x + y − 1) = 0 When λ1 = λ2 = 0, stationarity reduces to 4( y − x)3 − 2( y − x) = 0 ,

which yields three critical points given by ˆy = x, ˆy = x ± 1

√246 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. 

Figure 20: Lower-level objective and its minima for a fixed upper-level decision. Evaluating the second derivative, 

∂2f∂y 2 = 12( y − x)2 − 2,

we find that ˆ y = x corresponds to a local maximum 

 ∂2f∂y 2 = −2 < 0



, whereas ˆ y = x ± 1√2 are global minima 

 ∂2f∂y 2 = 4 > 0



. Hence, the lower-level (KKT) solution set is Ψ( x) = 



x − 1

√2 , x + 1

√2



In the optimistic formulation, the follower selects the ˆ y that minimizes the upper-level objective 

F (x, ˆy) among its global minimizers. Substituting ˆ yo = x − 1√2 gives 

F (x, ˆyo) = 2 



x − 12√2

2

+

 34 − 1√2



,

which is minimized at 

x∗ = 12√2 , y∗ = − 12√2 ,

with corresponding value 

F (x∗, y ∗) = 34 − 1√2

At this stage the BOP is equivalently cast as a Mathematical Program with Equilibrium Constraints (MPEC), in which the equilibrium is provided by the follower’s KKT conditions. This special case is known as a Mathematical Program with Complementarity Constraints (MPCC). The KKT system com-prises stationarity, primal feasibility, dual feasibility, and complementarity. At the optimistic optimizer (x∗, y ∗), the follower’s constraints are strictly inactive, so λ1 = λ2 = 0. Hence, only the stationarity condition enters the leader’s KKT, through the multiplier β. With 

s(x, y, λ 1, λ 2) = 4( y − x)3 − 2( y − x) + 2 λ1y + λ2 = 0 ,

the leader’s KKT requires 

∇xF + β ∂ xs = 0 , ∇y F + β ∂ y s = 0 ,

which at ( x∗, y ∗) yield 

β = 14

 1√2 − 1



In the pessimistic formulation, the follower instead selects the ˆ y that maximizes F (x, ˆy) among its minimizers. Substituting ˆ yp = x + 1√2 gives 

F (x, ˆyp) = 2 



x + 12√2

2

+

 34 + 1√2



,

47 Bilevel Optimization for Neural Architecture Search A. Shukla et al. with minimum attained at 

x∗ = − 12√2 , y∗ = 12√2 ,

and objective value 

F (x∗, y ∗) = 34 + 1√2

Here too, the problem reduces to an MPCC via the follower’s KKT embedding. As in the optimistic case, the follower’s constraints are inactive at the solution, leaving only the stationarity condition active in the leader’s KKT. This yields the multiplier 

β = − 1+1 /√24

In both optimistic and pessimistic solutions, the follower’s feasibility constraints are slack, so their mul-tipliers vanish and complementarity holds automatically. Consequently, only the follower’s stationarity condition contributes to the leader’s KKT. If a follower constraint were active at the solution, the associ-ated multiplier would be nonzero and the corresponding condition would appear explicitly in the leader’s KKT system. 48