Title: Bayesian Optimization in Sequence-to-Architecture Latent Space for Zero-Shot NAS

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.06167v1

Published Time: Tue, 06 Oct 2026 02:50:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 18

Markdown Content:
# Bayesian Optimization in Sequence-to-Architecture Latent Space for Zero-Shot NAS 

Ondˇ rej Týbl Department of Cybernetics FEE Czech Technical University 

tyblondr@cvut.cz 

Lukáš Neumann Department of Cybernetics FEE Czech Technical University 

lukas.neumann@cvut.cz 

Abstract 

Zero-shot Neural Architecture Search removes the prohibitive cost of traditional NAS, but its search process is typically based on the evolutionary algorithm (EA); lacking an explicit model of the objective, it often resorts to a near-random search through mutation. Bayesian Optimization offers a principled alternative by modeling the objective and aggregating information across iterations, but scales poorly to the high-dimensional, discrete, graph-structured spaces of modern NAS, restricting its use to only small networks. In this paper, we bring Bayesian Optimization to zero-shot NAS for large-scale architectures by learning a latent space via a Variational Autoencoder trained to reconstruct a novel prefix encoding of architectures and propose a proxy scalarization that combines several zero-shot proxies into a single Bayesian Optimization objective. After only 10,000 iterations of the proposed search algorithm (8 hours on a single GPU), our method found a network architecture which under the given model parameter count constraints achieves state-of-the-art results on three separate tasks – image classification, object detection and semantic segmentation. 

# 1 Introduction 

Zero-shot (training-free) Neural Architecture Search (NAS) methods have been recently gaining popularity, because they democratize NAS by removing the tremendous computational requirements associated with traditional NAS, and as such they allow to search for novel, more efficient and/or more accurate deep network architectures at a fraction of a cost and energy. The key component of every zero-shot NAS method is the search algorithm that determines which new candidate architectures should be evaluated, based on estimated performance of network architectures evaluated in previous steps, ideally steering the search towards more promising candidates as the algorithm progresses. The majority of zero-shot methods (Lee and Ham, 2024; Tybl and Neumann, 2025; Li et al., 2023) rely on the Evolutionary Algorithm (EA), because it can handle the large search space of modern deep network architectures. But EA has no explicit model of the objective and as such the results are often very close to a random search; often the only operation used to traverse the search space is the mutation operation, which essentially is just a random perturbation of the current state. Bayesian Optimization (BO), on the other hand is a formal framework that explicitly builds a probabilistic model of the objective function and is therefore able to aggregate information obtained in previous steps to specifically guide the search towards more promising regions of the search space. Bayesian Optimization (BO) however scales poorly to high dimensions and discrete, structured spaces , which unfortunately is exactly the type of search space encountered in NAS methods, where the architectures are discrete graphs consisting of nodes, each of which has several hyper-parameters. This is why the application of Bayesian Optimization in zero-shot NAS Kandasamy et al. (2018); Ru et al. (2021); Shen et al. (2023); Camero et al. (2021) has so far been limited to only toy problems or small networks, simply because direct application to 1arXiv:2610.06167v1 [cs.CV] 5 Oct 2026 modern large-scale architectures with hundreds of nodes is computationally prohibitive. In this paper, we present a novel method that allows to apply Bayesian Optimization (BO) to searching large-scale network architectures in zero-shot NAS, thus eliminating the computational burden of traditional NAS, as well as removing complexity constraints of naively applying BO to the high-dimensional space of large network architectures. We achieve this by introducing a novel latent space that can represent modern large-scale architectures including EfficientNet Tan and Le (2019) and Vision Transformer Dosovitskiy et al. (2020), by training a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) that learns to reconstruct network architectures expressed by prefix encoding that serializes each architecture block into a compact, bijective string over a vocabulary of primitive and compound operations. The resulting latent space provides a smooth, low-dimensional representation of large-scale heterogeneous architectures suitable as the search domain for Bayesian Optimization. Additionally, we propose a new proxy scalarization method that allows us to combine several state-of-the-art zero-shot proxies into a single objective. The scalarization whitens and decorrelates the proxy dimensions and, unlike rank-based aggregations, can be evaluated pointwise for any architecture, which is a key prerequisite for modern gradient-free optimization. As a result, our method – unlike previous methods based on evolutionary algorithms – is able to learn and exploit the properties of the NAS search space during the search process. Finally, we use our newly introduced latent space to run Bayesian Optimization, using the scalarized proxy of classification accuracy as the objective function, to search for new architectures. The best architecture as per the proxy value (found without training any of the candidate networks) is only then trained using the standard UniNAS training recipe Tybl and Neumann (2026) to obtain the actual accuracy in three different vision tasks (image classification, object detection/instance segmentation, semantic segmentation). In summary, we make the following contributions: 1. We introduce a novel latent space that can represent modern large-scale architectures including EfficientNet Tan and Le (2019) or Vision Transformer Dosovitskiy et al. (2020), but which at the same time can be used in modern optimization frameworks such as Bayesian Optimization (BO), 2. we propose using prefix encoding as the sequential (string-like) representation of network architectures, which yields compact and a bijective mapping to the standard DAG representation, 3. we propose proxy scalarization method that allows to combine several zero-shot proxies into a single continuous scalar score, so that modern zero-shot approaches can be incorporated into a standard Bayesian Optimization framework. 

# 2 Related Work 

Neural Architecture Search is characterized by two core components: a performance signal – ranging from zero-shot proxies to full training accuracy – and a search strategy that governs how the architecture space is navigated given the signal. We organize prior work along the search-strategy axis, showing how each strategy interacts and scales with the underlying architecture search space. 

Evolutionary algorithms (EAs). EA leverages population-based optimization to explore architecture spaces without requiring differentiable relaxations. In the classical setting, new candidates are generated by applying mutation operators to the current population. When combined with zero-shot performance proxies – which bypass full training of candidate architectures – this paradigm has achieved competitive results (Lee and Ham, 2024; Tybl and Neumann, 2025; Li et al., 2023) on ImageNet-1K (Deng et al., 2009). A more recent line of work replaces mutation with learned diffusion models as the generative mechanism (An et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2025). However, these diffusion-based approaches require training of a large number of networks 2to fit the generative model, incurring substantial computational cost; put simply, they are not zero-shot. More broadly, evolutionary methods – whether mutation- or diffusion-based – require many architecture evaluations to converge, as they rely on stochastic variation and selection rather than model-guided search. Moreover, because each new candidate is derived from local perturbations of existing ones, the search tends to remain in the neighborhood of the initial population, limiting its ability to discover novel architectures. 

Bayesian optimization with hand-crafted encodings. Bayesian optimization (BO) offers a principled, sample-efficient alternative to evolutionary search by constructing a surrogate model of the objective function. A central design choice when applying BO to NAS is how architectures are represented. Several works define hand-crafted encodings paired with tailored kernel functions: Kandasamy et al. (2018) proposed a kernel based on optimal transport over graph representations, evaluated on a space of simple ConvNets; Ru et al. (2021) introduced an interpretable kernel on similar cell-based spaces as a refinement of Kandasamy et al. (2018); White et al. (2021) employed a path-based encoding with an ensemble of neural predictors; and Jin et al. (2019) used an edit-distance kernel over architectures. Zero-shot variants have also been explored, with Shen et al. (2023) applying proxy-based BO on NASBench-201 and Camero et al. (2021) combining BO with a hyperparameter encoding kernel for recurrent architectures. All of these methods, however, rely on the encoding remaining low-dimensional, which fundamentally limits their scalability – none have been demonstrated on large scale datasets such as ImageNet-1K (Deng et al., 2009). The notable exception is Ouertatani (2024), who operates at ImageNet scale but restricts the search to a narrow set of configuration choices, sidestepping the encoding scalability problem rather than solving it. Nearly all of these methods have only been validated on small, cell-based search spaces such as NASBench-201; the few ImageNet-1K results rely on transfer from a proxy task and yield modest accuracy (Li et al., 2020; Panda et al., 2021). More fundamentally, each encoding is tied to a narrow operation set and breaks down when the space grows to 20 or more node types – as required to jointly cover convolutional and transformer operations. Edit-distance kernels (Jin et al., 2019) face a combinatorial explosion over operation types; path-based encodings (White et al., 2021) assume a small, fixed operation set; vector encodings (Li et al., 2020; Ouertatani, 2024) demand manual redesign for every new vocabulary; and optimal-transport kernels (Kandasamy et al., 2018) incur costs that grow with both graph size and operation diversity. No existing hand-crafted encoding offers a general, scalable representation for the mixed search spaces that modern architecture design demands. 

Bayesian optimization with learned encodings. An alternative to hand-crafting architecture representations is to learn them from data, typically via graph neural networks. Sun and Shen (2025) and Hemmi et al. (2024) paired BO with variational graph autoencoders (VGAEs), reporting results on CIFAR-100 and CIFAR-10 (Krizhevsky, 2009), respectively, while Hemmi et al. (2025) explored random perturbations in a VGAE-learned latent space on CIFAR-10 (transferred to ImageNet-1K with accuracy well below 80% ). Graph convolutional networks (GCNs) have also served as encoders: Shi et al. (2020) combined BO with a GCN-based predictor, achieving 74.6% on ImageNet-1K via transfer from NASBench-201, and Ma et al. (2019) in the context of small images (like CIFAR, MNIST). Existing results thus remain confined to small benchmarks or narrow search spaces, and it is unclear whether learned representations transfer to the large, heterogeneous spaces we target. 

Differentiable architecture search. DARTS-based methods (Ye et al., 2022) relax the discrete search space into a continuous one, enabling gradient-based optimization. Ye et al. (2022) achieved 76.2% on ImageNet-1K. Multi-objective extensions such as NSGANetV2 (Lu et al., 2020) reached 80.4% on ImageNet-1K but required training approximately 2 000 networks during search. Transfer-based approaches have also been explored: Panda et al. (2021) applied BO on CIFAR-100 and transferred the discovered architecture to ImageNet, reaching roughly 71% top-1 accuracy – underscoring the difficulty of cross-dataset transfer in NAS. 3Figure 1: We first train a variational autoencoder (VAE) to create a smooth, low-dimensional representation of large-scale heterogeneous architectures (left). Then, the latent space is used for Bayesian Optimization with zero-shot accuracy proxies aggregate as the objective function (right). 

# 3 Sequence-to-architecture Latent Space 

In this section, we begin by describing the architecture search space we adapted, followed by our method of encoding network architectures into a unified latent space (Figure 1 – left). The latent space is then used in Bayesian optimization framework to find network architectures with best accuracy (Figure 1 – right). 

3.1 Architecture space 

We adopt UniNAS (Tybl and Neumann, 2026) – a unified generic search space of network architectures – which contains many well-established hand-crafted topologies including ResNet He et al. (2016), Efficient-Net Tan and Le (2019), ViT Dosovitskiy et al. (2020), and CoAtNet Dai et al. (2021). At the same time, the search space is also a superset of popular but small-scale NAS benchmarks such as NAS-Bench Dong and Yang (2020); Ying et al. (2019), Zen-NAS Lin et al. (2021) and AutoFormer Chen et al. (2021a;b), and therefore results achieved in the UniNAS can be viewed as a generalization of the smaller benchmarks. In UniNAS, each network is represented as a sequence of stages, each containing multiple blocks. Each block is a directed acyclic graph (DAG), which consists of 27 node types that represent elementary operations covering convolution types, matrix multiplications, normalizations, nonlinearities, additions, chunking, and other general tensor operations with varying input/output shapes. The only structural constraint is that the block’s input and output must have identical dimensions and that adjacent nodes in the DAG have matching tensor shapes. 

3.2 Prefix encoding 

The DAG representation of UniNAS nodes is flexible but difficult to encode compactly, and it does not surface the structured patterns – such as inverted bottleneck, residual skip connection, multi-head attention – that characterize modern architectures. We therefore introduce compound nodes , which wrap one or more inner sequential operations into a single node (represented as Sequential operation in PyTorch). The child nodes of compound nodes are again drawn from the same vocabulary, yielding a recursive grammar. We refer to the number of independent sequential operations of a compound node as its arity .For example, a global average pooling node constitutes a compound node with arity of one, because it only wraps a single sequence of operations; a branching node that distributes its input into two branches and then adds the results of these branches is a compound node with arity of two, because it has two independent sequential operations. Each compound node type also uniquely determines the spatial dimensionality of 4children node inputs as well as of the compound node output. Using the same example as above, the children nodes of a global average pooling node always have the input dimension of (C, 1, 1) due to the spatial dimensionality reduction coming from global average; on the other hand, the children nodes of a branch node have the same input dimension as the parent compound node. For full description of all compound nodes, see Table 5 in Appendix. With the introduction of compound nodes, we obtain a more compact version of the UniNAS space with 20 different node types (13 simple nodes and 7 compound nodes ), but at the same time we do not lose the expressive power to encode modern convolution and transformer architectures and their hybrids. In our method, we therefore represent each block as a pair (prefix, shape), where prefix is a string encoding of the block’s parse-graph topology described below and shape denotes the block’s input (and hence output) dimensions (C, H, W )1.The encoding exploits the fact that every compound node has a fixed arity, i.e. a predetermined number of inner compound nodes, which makes the serialization self-delimiting without brackets or separators. Specifically, the encoding is defined inductively: 1. Leaf nodes. If a DAG consists of a single primitive operation from Table 5, it is assigned a unique single character. 2. Sequential composition. If a DAG is composed of two sub-DAGs in sequence, each having prefix encoding s1 and s2, it is assigned a prefix encoding s1s2.3. Compound nodes. If a DAG is composed of a compound node having the single-character prefix encoding c with sub-modules with prefix encodings s1, . . . , s n, then it is assigned a prefix encoding 

cs 1. · · · sn.

As a result, every UniNAS block is associated with a unique encoding (prefix, shape). De-serializing the encoding into an actual computation graph that can be executed on a GPU requires one additional check: that the declared input/output shape can be consistently propagated to all internal nodes. For instance, a block of shape (4 , 16 , 16) cannot comprise two nested convolutions each reducing the channel count by a factor of 4, since the intermediate dimensions would become infeasible. This shape-consistency condition is the 

only constraint beyond syntactic well-formedness that must be verified for a prefix string to specify a valid block. This yields a compact, bijective serialization of the full computational DAG topology (see Appendix for worked example). 

3.3 Latent Space Encoding 

To allow continuous optimization over the space of UniNAS blocks, we train a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) that defines a mapping from latent vectors to block prefix strings. The encoder maps a computational graph G to a diagonal-Gaussian posterior qϕ(z | G) = N μϕ(G), diag σ2

> ϕ

(G) in Rdz , where dz = 32 ; the decoder autoregressively reconstructs the block’s prefix token sequence x = ( x1, . . . , x T ) from a sampled latent vector. Both modules are trained end-to-end by maximizing the evidence lower bound 

L(ϕ, θ ; G) = Eqϕ(z|G)

 log pθ(x | z) − β D KL 

 qϕ(z | G) ∥ N (0, I), (1) where β controls the rate–distortion trade-off Higgins et al. (2017). 

Alignment-aware reconstruction loss. Rather than standard position-wise cross-entropy, we use soft-DTW 

loss Cuturi and Blondel (2017) as the reconstruction term log pθ(x | z). Let ˆx = (ˆ x1, . . . , ˆxT ′ ) denote the decoded token sequence and let e : V → Rd be the shared token embedding. Soft-DTW first constructs a 

> 1Defining only the input shape suffices, since internal node shapes are uniquely determined by propagating through the graph.

5pairwise cost matrix C ∈ RT ′×T with entries 

Cij = fθ(ˆ xi, z) − e(xj ) 2, (2) where fθ maps each decoded position to the same embedding space. The loss then computes the minimum-cost monotone alignment between ˆx and x via the γ-smoothed soft-minimum recursion (a log-sum-exp relaxation of the standard DTW dynamic programme) Cuturi and Blondel (2017). This alignment-aware formulation confers a concrete advantage over strict position-wise cross-entropy as it is shift-tolerant : Suppose that ˆx and x differ only by a single prefix token inserted at the beginning, that is 

ˆx = (ˆ x1, x 1, . . . , x T −1) . Then, the cross-entropy becomes large as it detects misalignment at each position of the sequence. However, soft-DTW remains small, as this alignment cost is controlled by the edit distance (up to the smoothing parameter γ) and architecturally minor perturbations remain close in the reconstruction loss Cuturi and Blondel (2017); Le Guen and Thome (2019). This is specifically useful in our situation as if we insert a single node into a DAG, its prefix encoding shifts entirely while the corresponding network is actually very similar (one operation more does not usually completely change the architecture). 

Encoder. The encoder treats the block’s DAG as an undirected graph – one node per operation, with bidirectional parent-child edges – and processes it with Lenc = 3 graph-convolutional layers of width 

d = 256 , each followed by a residual connection, GELU activation, and layer normalization. Global mean-pooling over all node representations yields a single d-dimensional vector, which a linear head projects to 

μ ∈ Rdz and log σ2 ∈ Rdz for reparameterization sampling. 

Decoder. The latent vector z ∈ Rdz is expanded into M = 8 memory tokens of dimension d = 256 by a learned linear projection. An autoregressive Transformer decoder ( Ldec = 4 layers, d = 256 , H = 4 heads, FFN width 512) then generates the prefix token sequence one token at a time, attending to the memory tokens and all previously generated tokens via causal masking. At inference time, decoding is constrained by a finite-state machine (FSM) over the prefix grammar, which guarantees that every emitted string is a syntactically valid prefix without post-hoc repair. We note, however, that the FSM enforces only syntactic well-formedness of the prefix (i.e. conformance to its inductive definition), not semantic feasibility of the resulting DAG: the decoder may still produce prefixes whose corresponding graphs violate shape-matching constraints. Such infeasible samples are discarded during search; in practice, fewer than 5% of decoded prefixes are rejected. 

Relation to graph variational autoencoders. Because our VAE encodes and decodes a sequential prefix string rather than an adjacency matrix, it differs from standard Graph VAEs Kipf and Welling (2016); Simonovsky and Komodakis (2018) in the decoder. This design choice is deliberate: the sequential representation admits a natural grammar constraint (the FSM above) that is difficult to impose on adjacency-matrix decoders, and it avoids the quadratic scaling of adjacency-based reconstruction with respect to the number of nodes. The encoder, by contrast, aligns with prior graph-VAE encoders. 

# 4 Search 

4.1 Zero-shot proxy 

The principal bottleneck in neural architecture search is the cost of evaluating candidate architectures: naïvely, each candidate must be trained to convergence before its quality can be assessed. Zero-shot (aka training-free) NAS methods sidestep this cost by replacing the full training-and-evaluation loop with a lightweight zero-cost proxy – a scalar score computed without training the network, yet demonstrably correlated with the final trained accuracy Abdelfattah et al. (2021); Lin et al. (2021); Lee and Ham (2024); Tybl and Neumann (2025). Our method fully embraces this paradigm: the entire search phase optimizes only a zero-cost proxy, with 6no gradient-based training whatsoever. Only after the search concludes we train a single architecture – the top-scoring candidate according to the proxy – to obtain the final model. This design makes the search itself orders of magnitude cheaper than approaches that require training each candidate, and concentrates the computational budget on a single, well-chosen training run. 

Training-free proxy. We adopt VKDNW Tybl and Neumann (2025) as the underlying zero-cost proxy. VKDNW achieves state-of-the-art rank correlation classification accuracy on multiple benchmarks and search spaces while requiring only a single forward pass through the network on random input data. VKDNW, like several other modern training-free proxies, is inherently multi-dimensional : it produces a vector of scores characterizing different aspects of an architecture (e.g., per-layer or per-block statistics) rather than a single scalar. To serve as the objective function of a search algorithm, these dimensions must be aggregated into a single scalar that can rank and compare architectures. A natural baseline is the nonlinear ranking scheme of AZ-NAS Lee and Ham (2024), which converts each proxy dimension into a rank and multiplicatively penalizes architectures that are not consistently well-ranked across all dimensions. However, this ranking-based aggregation is designed for search strategies that only require a relative ordering over a fixed, finite population of candidates (e.g., Evolutionary Algorithms operating on the current generation). Our setting demands a continuous scalar score that can be evaluated for any architecture in the search space – including previously unseen ones – because our optimization strategy must assess the absolute quality of arbitrary candidates rather than merely rank a pre-enumerated set. Ranking-based aggregation cannot satisfy this requirement: the rank of a new architecture is undefined without re-ranking the entire population. 

Proxy scalarization. We therefore propose a Mahalanobis-distance-based scalarization of the multi-dimensional proxy. Let p(α) ∈ Rk denote the k-dimensional vector of k individual training-free proxy values of an architecture α, and let μ and Σ denote the empirical mean and whitening matrix of proxy vectors computed over a calibration set of randomly sampled architectures from the search space. The scalarized proxy score s(α) ∈ R is defined as 

s(α) =  p(α) − μ⊤Σ−11, (3) where 1 denotes a vector of all ones, i.e. it is the sum of the standardized (whitened) marginal proxies, closely related to Mahalanobis distance McLachlan (1999) of the proxy vector from the population mean. This formulation has two desirable properties. (i) Scale normalization and decorrelation. Multiplication by 

Σ−1 simultaneously standardizes the scale of each proxy dimension—accounting for potentially disparate magnitudes and variances—and decorrelates the dimensions, preventing redundant information shared between correlated proxy components from being double-counted. Equivalently, equation 3 first applies a whitening transformation Kessy et al. (2018) to the proxy vectors and then sums entries, so that each transformed dimension contributes equally and independently to the final score. (ii) Pointwise evaluability. 

Unlike ranking-based methods, our score is a continuous function of the proxy vector and can be evaluated for any architecture without reference to a fixed population. This makes it compatible with gradient-free optimization, Bayesian optimization, or any other search strategy that evaluates candidates on the fly. 

4.2 Bayesian optimization 

We search for high-scoring architectures by running Bayesian optimization (BO) directly in the continuous latent space Z = Rdz , which was obtained by training the VAE (see Section 3.3). A candidate architecture is produced by decoding a latent vector z ∈ Z into a prefix string that is, in turn, decoded into a UniNAS block specification. The block is then used to build a full UniNAS model (Tybl and Neumann, 2026) following the CoAtNet-style macro-structure (Dai et al., 2021): a convolutional stem is followed by two stages of increasing 7channel width and decreasing spatial resolution in which the discovered block template is replicated, followed by two transformer stages. This yields a complete network architecture that is scored with the zero-cost proxies. We adopt the standard BO framework with a Gaussian process (GP) surrogate (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006) and expected improvement (EI) (Jones et al., 1998; Mockus et al., 1978) as the acquisition function; a detailed description of the framework is provided in Section A.4 in Appendix. BO is a well-established tool for hyperparameter tuning (Snoek et al., 2012) and has more recently been applied to neural architecture search (Kandasamy et al., 2018; White et al., 2021; Ru et al., 2021), but only on small networks due to its computational complexity on larger networks in its naive formulation. 

4.2.1 Design choices for latent-space architecture search 

We now describe the design choices that enable standard BO to operate effectively over the architecture latent space while respecting a target parameter budget. 

Model-size control. Because parameter count correlates strongly with proxy performance (Tybl and Neumann, 2025; Lee and Ham, 2024), controlling for model size is essential: without it, the search would tend to select larger networks rather than architecturally superior ones at a given scale. We enforce the parameter budget at two complementary levels. 

Soft penalty. A penalty on deviation from a target parameter count n⋆ is incorporated directly into the objective that enters the GP training set, shaping the surrogate landscape so that it rewards architectures near the desired size. Concretely, let s(α) denote the scalarized proxy score from equation 3 and n(z) the parameter count of the decoded architecture. The penalized objective is then 

˜s(z) = s α(z) − π n(z), π(n) = exp 

 |log( n/n ⋆)|

ρ



− 1, (4) where ρ > 0 is a penalty-scale hyperparameter. The exponential form grows super-linearly with the log-ratio deviation from n⋆, strongly discouraging large departures while remaining nearly flat in a neighborhood around the target. 

Hard budget mask. In addition, a hard mask zeros the acquisition function for any candidate whose predicted parameter count falls outside a feasible interval [nmin , n max ], preventing the search from proposing architectures that would exceed memory or compute constraints (see Equation (12) in Appendix). 

Latent decoding with retries. Each latent vector z proposed by BO is decoded via the VAE decoder described in Section 3.3. Because the decoder does not guarantee that every latent point maps to a valid architecture satisfying all shape-matching constraints, we employ a retry mechanism: if the resulting prefix cannot be instantiated as a UniNAS model, we perturb the latent vector up to M = 100 times with progressively increasing noise 

z(t) = z + δ√tε (t), ε(t) ∼ N  0, I dz

, (5) where δ > 0 and t ∈ { 1, . . . , M } is the retry index. The linearly growing variance ensures that early retries remain close to the original proposal (exploiting local smoothness of the latent space) while later retries explore more broadly if the local neighborhood contains no valid architecture. 

# 5 Experiments 

5.1 Sequence-to-Architecture Latent Space 

Training VAE. We train the sequence-to-architecture VAE on ∼96 K randomly generated UniNAS block prefixes, holding out 2 048 blocks for validation. Because feasible blocks are generated purely by symbolic 8Table 1: Top-1 image classification accuracy on ImageNet-1K (Deng et al., 2009). All models have a similar number of parameters and were trained using the UniNAS training protocol.                                

> Model Params FLOPs Top-1 (%) ResNet He et al. (2016) 24.8M 9.0G 75.19 EfficientNet Tan and Le (2019) 24.0M 6.0G 80.52 ViT Dosovitskiy et al. (2020); Dai et al. (2021) 26.4M 18.4G 80.64 CoAtNet Dai et al. (2021) 26.9M 8.44G 80.58 ZenNAS Lin et al. (2021) 26.3M 18.6G 80.48 AZ-NAS Lee and Ham (2024) 26.7M 19.0G 80.39 ZiCo Li et al. (2023) 27.0M 9.7G 80.85 UniNAS-A Tybl and Neumann (2026) 26.8M 9.0G 81.15
> ours 27.0M 9.1G 81.51

graph enumeration, this stage requires no GPU computation. The VAE uses a maximum token length of 96. The KL weight is linearly annealed from β = 0 to β = 10 −2 over the first 5 epochs and held fixed thereafter; training runs for 50 epochs with batch size 128. We optimize with Adam Kingma and Ba (2014) using a learning rate of 10 −3, a weight decay of 10 −4, and a gradient clipping at 1.0. The model has 4.2M parameters and trains in approximately 12 GPU hours on a single NVidia A100. 

Reconstruction error. To evaluate how faithfully the autoencoder preserves architectural structure through the encode–decode round trip, we measure reconstruction quality via the normalised Levenshtein distance 

(Levenshtein, 1966) between the decoded and ground-truth token sequences. Given two token sequences x

and ˆx of lengths T and T ′, the normalized edit distance is 

dlev (x, ˆx) = ed( x, ˆx)max( T, T ′) , (6) where ed( ·, ·) is the Wagner–Fischer edit distance (Wagner and Fischer, 1974), i.e. the minimum number of single-token insertions, deletions, and substitutions needed to transform one sequence into the other. Dividing by the longer sequence length yields a scale-invariant metric bounded in [0 , 1] , where 0 indicates a perfect token-for-token match. Our sequence-to-architecture VAE achieves substantially higher reconstruction accuracy than a standard VGAE and comparable graph-based generative baselines, confirming that the token-level formulation better captures the compositional structure of UniNAS blocks (see Appendix fig. 2). This stronger reconstruction is a prerequisite for our approach: because the search operates on prefix-conditioned latent codes, the encoder must faithfully map diverse block topologies into a smooth latent space—a requirement that graph-level embeddings do not satisfy to the same degree. 

5.2 Architecture Search 

The search is seeded from the union of three complementary architecture pools - randomly grown graphs, random-walk graphs, and mutation-perturbed graphs—designed to provide broad initial coverage of the design space. We sample Kseed = 256 architectures uniformly from this union and evaluate the scalarized zero-shot proxy (see Section 4.1). The resulting scores are used to fit the scalarizer statistics μ and Σ (Eq. 3) once; these are frozen for the remainder of the search. Each seed architecture is encoded to its deterministic posterior mean μϕ(s) and inserted into the BO observation set together with its penalized composite score. We run the process for 10 000 iterations, resulting in a total 8 GPU hours. 

Image classification. After the fixed number of iterations, we collect all evaluated architectures whose parameter count falls within the target budget (centered on the n⋆ from equation 4, as the search concentrates its evaluations in this region). From this budget-compliant subset, we select the architecture at the 99 th 9Table 2: Comparison of zero-shot (training-free) NAS optimization strategies by best reported top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1K (Deng et al., 2009). † denotes methods where optimal architecture was found on a smaller dataset (CIFAR) and then upscaled before training on ImageNet-1K.                   

> Method Search strategy Top-1 (%) GPU days
> β-DARTS† Ye et al. (2022) Differentiable (DARTS space) 76.1 0.4 GP-NAS† Li et al. (2020) Bayesian Opt. w/ hand-crafted encoding 73.4 0.9 BONAS† Shi et al. (2020) Bayesian Opt. w/ learned encoding 75.4 10.0 UniNAS-A Tybl and Neumann (2026) Evolutionary Algorithm 81.15 0.5
> ours Bayesian Opt. w/ seq-to-arch latent enc. 81.51 0.33

Table 3: Accuracy of object detection & instance segmentation on MS-COCO Lin et al. (2014) and semantic segmentation on ADE20K Zhou et al. (2017). AP b, AP m and mIoU denote box and mask average precision and mean intersection over union, respectively.                                                  

> Object Detection and Seg. Semantic Segmentation
> Model Params AP bAP mFPS FLOPs mIoU FPS FLOPs ResNet He et al. (2016) 24.8M 37.7 34.7 102.8 184G 39.3 481.2 47G EfficientNet Tan and Le (2019) 24.0M 39.0 35.8 43.1 124G 37.0 152.6 32G CoAtNet Dai et al. (2021) 26.9M 41.3 38.4 14.4 296G 42.4 61.7 51G UniNAS-A Tybl and Neumann (2026) 26.8M 42.4 39.0 14.2 297G 45.6 88.2 51G
> ours 27.0M 42.9 39.8 13.5 305G 46.1 62.4 51G

percentile of the penalized objective ˜s rather than the outright maximum, as we find that the very top of the proxy-score distribution is susceptible to noise and proxy miscalibration. The architecture was then trained from scratch on ImageNet-1K (Deng et al., 2009) using the UniNAS training protocol Tybl and Neumann (2026), which we follow without modification. The training took 32 hours on 8 A100 GPUs. The model achieves state-of-the-art top-1 accuracy on the ImageNet validation set among models trained with the standard UniNAS protocol (Table 1). Compared to accuracy reported by other zero- and one-shot approaches on the same task (Table 2), our method also clearly discovers highest-scoring architecture for the smallest GPU cost, demonstrating that the combination of a well-structured latent space with BO-guided exploration outperforms baselines. 

Downstream tasks. To assess the generality of the discovered architecture beyond image classification, we fine-tune the ImageNet-pretrained backbone on two downstream tasks – object detection and instance segmentation on MS-COCO (Lin et al., 2014) and semantic segmentation on ADE20K (Zhou et al., 2017). The training took 24 hours, respectively 15 hours on 4 A100 GPUs. All fine-tuning hyper-parameters, data augmentation, and training schedules follow the standard UniNAS protocol Tybl and Neumann (2026), so that differences in reported metrics can be attributed solely to the choice of backbone architecture. As demonstrated in Table 3, the advantage carries over to downstream tasks: our backbone exceeds competing architectures under the same budget constraints, confirming that the design found by our search generalizes beyond the classification. 

Ablations. In Table 4, we replace each of our three components with its closest alternative while keeping the rest of the pipeline and the training protocol fixed. Without the latent space, BO is not applicable, so we fall to evolutionary search as in Tybl and Neumann (2026), with the same search budget and our scalarized proxy; accuracy drops to 80.0% ( −1.5 pp). When removing the scalarizer we cannot use a composite proxy as rank-aggregations cannot drive BO (unlike EA), whose surrogate needs an absolute score for each architecture, so we optimize the strongest single proxy, VKDNW Tybl and Neumann (2025), instead; accuracy falls to 10 Table 4: Ablation of the main components. We remove each component and replace it with the closest alternative. †BO did not improve the proxy, and the final architecture training diverged.                          

> Variant Search Latent space Proxy Top-1 (%) ∆
> Ours (full) BO prefix-based scalarized 81.5 –w/o latent space EA none scalarized 80.0 −1.5
> w/o proxy scalarization BO prefix-based VKDNW (single) 77.2 −4.3
> w/o prefix encoding BO graph-based (VGAE) scalarized diverged †–

77.2%. Replacing the sequence-to-architecture VAE with a graph-based VGAE is the most damaging change: its reconstruction error stays close to the random level (see Supplementary Material), BO does not improve the proxy at all, and the selected architecture diverges during training. All three components are therefore necessary. 

# 6 Conclusion 

We proposed a novel zero-shot NAS method which uses Bayesian Optimization in a newly proposed latent space. The method handles modern large-scale architectures and it allows for using a combination of training-free proxies, thanks to the newly proposed proxy scalarization objective. After only 10 000 iterations of the search (8 hours on a single GPU), our method found a network architecture which under the given model parameter count constraints achieves state-of-the-art results on three separate tasks – image classification, object detection/instance segmentation and semantic segmentation; this result was achieved using the official standard UniNAS training recipe, i.e. without any additional bells and whistles or hyper-parameter tuning. In future work, we plan to evaluate how well our trained autoencoder generalizes to different search spaces and whether the learned latent representations remain effective when paired with alternative search strategies, such as CMA-ES Hansen (2016), beyond the BO framework employed here. Second, our proxy scalarizer remains fixed throughout the search, yet the distribution of zero-shot values evolves as the search progresses. Adaptively recalibrating the weights to account for this drift could further improve the search efficiency. 

# References 

Mohamed S. Abdelfattah, Abhinav Mehrotra, Łukasz Dudziak, and Nicholas D. Lane. Zero-cost proxies for lightweight NAS. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.08134 , 2021. Sohyun An, Hayeon Lee, Jaehyeong Jo, Seanie Lee, and Sung Ju Hwang. DiffusionNAG: Predictor-guided neural architecture generation with diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16943 , 2023. Andrés Camero, Hao Wang, Enrique Alba, and Thomas Bäck. Bayesian neural architecture search using a training-free performance metric. Applied Soft Computing , 106:107356, 2021. Minghao Chen, Houwen Peng, Jianlong Fu, and Haibin Ling. AutoFormer: Searching transformers for visual recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 12270–12280, 2021a. Minghao Chen, Kan Wu, Bolin Ni, Houwen Peng, Bei Liu, Jianlong Fu, Hongyang Chao, and Haibin Ling. Searching the search space of vision transformer. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34: 8714–8726, 2021b. 11 Marco Cuturi and Mathieu Blondel. Soft-DTW: A differentiable loss function for time-series. In Proceedings of the 34th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , pages 894–903, 2017. Zihang Dai, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V. Le, and Mingxing Tan. CoAtNet: Marrying convolution and attention for all data sizes. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 34:3965–3977, 2021. Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 248–255, 2009. Xuanyi Dong and Yi Yang. NAS-Bench-201: Extending the scope of reproducible neural architecture search. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.00326 , 2020. Alexey Dosovitskiy, Lucas Beyer, Alexander Kolesnikov, Dirk Weissenborn, Xiaohua Zhai, Thomas Un-terthiner, Mostafa Dehghani, Matthias Minderer, Georg Heigold, Sylvain Gelly, Jakob Uszkoreit, and Neil Houlsby. An image is worth 16x16 words: Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.11929 , 2020. Roman Garnett. Bayesian Optimization . Cambridge University Press, 2023. Nikolaus Hansen. The CMA evolution strategy: A tutorial. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.00772 , 2016. Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recognition. In 

Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 770–778, 2016. Kazuki Hemmi, Yuki Tanigaki, and Masaki Onishi. NAVIGATOR-D3: Neural architecture search using variational graph auto-encoder toward optimal architecture design for diverse datasets. In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks (ICANN) , pages 292–307. Springer, 2024. Kazuki Hemmi, Yuki Tanigaki, Kaisei Hara, and Masaki Onishi. Graph-embedded neural architecture search: A variational approach for optimized model design. Computers, Materials & Continua , 84(2):2245–2271, 2025. Irina Higgins, Loic Matthey, Arka Pal, Christopher Burgess, Xavier Glorot, Matthew Botvinick, Shakir Mohamed, and Alexander Lerchner. β-VAE: Learning basic visual concepts with a constrained variational framework. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2017. Haifeng Jin, Qingquan Song, and Xia Hu. Auto-Keras: An efficient neural architecture search system. In 

Proceedings of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (KDD) , pages 1946–1956, 2019. Donald R. Jones, Matthias Schonlau, and William J. Welch. Efficient global optimization of expensive black-box functions. Journal of Global Optimization , 13(4):455–492, 1998. Kirthevasan Kandasamy, Willie Neiswanger, Jeff Schneider, Barnabas Poczos, and Eric P. Xing. Neural architecture search with Bayesian optimisation and optimal transport. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 31, 2018. Agnan Kessy, Alex Lewin, and Korbinian Strimmer. Optimal whitening and decorrelation. The American Statistician , 72(4):309–314, 2018. Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980 , 2014. Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Variational graph auto-encoders. arXiv preprint arXiv:1611.07308 , 2016. Alex Krizhevsky. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Technical report, University of Toronto, 2009. Vincent Le Guen and Nicolas Thome. Shape and time distortion loss for training deep time series forecasting models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 32, 2019. 12 Junghyup Lee and Bumsub Ham. AZ-NAS: Assembling zero-cost proxies for network architecture search. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 5893–5903, 2024. Vladimir I. Levenshtein. Binary codes capable of correcting deletions, insertions, and reversals. Soviet Physics Doklady , 10(8):707–710, 1966. Guihong Li, Yuedong Yang, Kartikeya Bhardwaj, and Radu Marculescu. ZiCo: Zero-shot NAS via inverse coefficient of variation on gradients. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) ,2023. Zhihang Li, Teng Xi, Jiankang Deng, Gang Zhang, Shengzhao Wen, and Ran He. GP-NAS: Gaussian process based neural architecture search. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 11933–11942, 2020. Ming Lin, Pichao Wang, Zhenhong Sun, Hesen Chen, Xiuyu Sun, Qi Qian, Hao Li, and Rong Jin. Zen-NAS: A zero-shot NAS for high-performance image recognition. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , pages 347–356, 2021. Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Dollár, and C. Lawrence Zitnick. Microsoft COCO: Common objects in context. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pages 740–755. Springer, 2014. Zhichao Lu, Kalyanmoy Deb, Erik Goodman, Wolfgang Banzhaf, and Vishnu Naresh Boddeti. NSGANetV2: Evolutionary multi-objective surrogate-assisted neural architecture search. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV) , pages 35–51. Springer, 2020. Lizheng Ma, Jiaxu Cui, and Bo Yang. Deep neural architecture search with deep graph Bayesian optimization. In IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence (WI) , pages 500–507, 2019. Geoffrey J. McLachlan. Mahalanobis distance. Resonance , 4(6):20–26, 1999. Jonas Mockus, Vytautas Tiesis, and Antanas Zilinskas. The application of Bayesian methods for seeking the extremum. Towards Global Optimization , 2:117–129, 1978. Houssem Ouertatani. Efficient Deep Neural Architecture Search via Bayesian Optimization: An Application to Computer Vision . PhD thesis, Université de Lille, 2024. Rameswar Panda, Michele Merler, Mayoore S. Jaiswal, Hui Wu, Kandan Ramakrishnan, Ulrich Finkler, Chun-Fu Richard Chen, Minsik Cho, Rogerio Feris, David Kung, and Bishwaranjan Bhattacharjee. NASTransfer: Analyzing architecture transferability in large scale neural architecture search. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 35, pages 9294–9302, 2021. Carl Edward Rasmussen and Christopher K. I. Williams. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning . MIT Press, 2006. Binxin Ru, Xingchen Wan, Xiaowen Dong, and Michael Osborne. Interpretable neural architecture search via Bayesian optimisation with Weisfeiler-Lehman kernels. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2021. Bobak Shahriari, Kevin Swersky, Ziyu Wang, Ryan P. Adams, and Nando de Freitas. Taking the human out of the loop: A review of Bayesian optimization. Proceedings of the IEEE , 104(1):148–175, 2016. Yu Shen, Yang Li, Jian Zheng, Wentao Zhang, Peng Yao, Jixiang Li, Sen Yang, Ji Liu, and Bin Cui. ProxyBO: Accelerating neural architecture search via Bayesian optimization with zero-cost proxies. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 37, pages 9792–9801, 2023. Han Shi, Renjie Pi, Hang Xu, Zhenguo Li, James T. Kwok, and Tong Zhang. Bridging the gap between sample-based and one-shot neural architecture search with BONAS. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, 2020. 13 Martin Simonovsky and Nikos Komodakis. GraphVAE: Towards generation of small graphs using variational autoencoders. In International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks (ICANN) , pages 412–422. Springer, 2018. Jasper Snoek, Hugo Larochelle, and Ryan P. Adams. Practical Bayesian optimization of machine learning algorithms. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 25, 2012. Zijun Sun and Yanning Shen. Learn to explore: Meta NAS via Bayesian optimization guided graph generation. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.09467 , 2025. Mingxing Tan and Quoc Le. EfficientNet: Rethinking model scaling for convolutional neural networks. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , pages 6105–6114. PMLR, 2019. Ondrej Tybl and Lukas Neumann. Training-free neural architecture search through variance of knowledge of deep network weights. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 14881–14890, 2025. Ondrej Tybl and Lukas Neumann. Universal neural architecture space: Covering ConvNets, transformers and everything in between. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , pages 3679–3688, 2026. Robert A. Wagner and Michael J. Fischer. The string-to-string correction problem. Journal of the ACM , 21 (1):168–173, 1974. Colin White, Willie Neiswanger, and Yash Savani. BANANAS: Bayesian optimization with neural archi-tectures for neural architecture search. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence ,volume 35, pages 10293–10301, 2021. Peng Ye, Baopu Li, Yikang Li, Tao Chen, Jiayuan Fan, and Wanli Ouyang. β-DARTS: Beta-decay regular-ization for differentiable architecture search. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 10874–10883, 2022. Chris Ying, Aaron Klein, Eric Christiansen, Esteban Real, Kevin Murphy, and Frank Hutter. NAS-Bench-101: Towards reproducible neural architecture search. In International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , pages 7105–7114. PMLR, 2019. Bingye Zhou, Caiyang Yu, and Chenwei Tang. Evolution meets diffusion: Efficient neural architecture generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.17827 , 2025. Bolei Zhou, Hang Zhao, Xavier Puig, Sanja Fidler, Adela Barriuso, and Antonio Torralba. Scene parsing through ADE20K dataset. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pages 633–641, 2017. 14 A Supplementary Material 

A.1 VAE training curves 

Figure 2 shows the validation curves of the variational autoencoder used to embed prefix-encoded architectures into the continuous latent space searched by Bayesian optimization. 

Figure 2: Network architecture reconstruction error (Levenshtein distance) of a variational autoencoder, comparing four encoder–decoder combinations where each component is either graph-based or prefix-sequence-based. The traditional VGAE as well as graph-based methods fail to converge, motivating our use of a prefix-sequence decoder. 

A.2 Graph nodes 

Four compound nodes encode well-established convolutional patterns: E XPAND AND REDUCE (f ) applies inner operations at 4× the channel width (inverted bottleneck / transformer FFN); R EDUCE AND EXPAND (m)does the same at 14 the channels (bottleneck); A VG AND UPSAMPLE (a) collapses spatial dimensions globally before inner ops then upsamples (squeeze-and-excitation); and F ORK MERGE (copy, ×) ( g) forks the input to two parallel branches and multiplies their outputs element-wise (gating). Three further compound nodes open the space to transformer-style and hybrid architectures: F ORK MERGE (copy, +) ( r) adds two branches element-wise, realising residual skip connections that are absent from the original UniNAS leaf vocabulary; FORK MERGE (chunk, cat) ( o) channel-splits the input across two branches and concatenates their outputs; and F ORK MERGE ATTENTION (h) encodes multi-head self-attention as a single compound node storing a head-uniform per-head template of three branch modules ( Q/K/V projections), one connection module (attention weights), and one post-branch module, replicated n=⌊C/ 32 ⌋ times at model-construction time so that the head count scales automatically with the stage channel width C. Taken together, the vocabulary can express standard MBConv/EfficientNet blocks, Vision Transformer blocks, and the full spectrum of hybrid architectures that freely interleave convolutional and attentional operations within and across stages — all within a single unified grammar. 15 Letter Node Arity Status Description 

Leaf nodes (no children) — 13 retained from UniNAS 

b BATCH NORM – used batch normalisation 

j LAYER NORM – used layer normalisation 

c CONV 1 – used 1×1 convolution 

d CONV 3 – used 3×3 convolution 

u CONV DEPTH 3 – used 3×3 depthwise convolution 

e CONV DEPTH 5 – used 5×5 depthwise convolution 

i GELU – used GELU activation 

w SIGMOID – used sigmoid activation 

v MAX POOL – used max pooling 

n REL POS BIAS – used relative positional bias 

q SOFTMAX – used softmax (attention weights) 

t MASK – used attention mask 

s DROPOUT – used dropout 

UniNAS primitives not retained as standalone operations 

– ConvExp4, ConvRed4 – subsumed folded into f / m

– GlobalAvg, UpSample – subsumed folded into a

– Copy, Multiply – subsumed folded into g

– Copy, Add – subsumed folded into r

– Chunk2, Concat2 – subsumed folded into o

– Matmul1, Matmul2 – subsumed folded into h

– ConvChunk3, Chunk3, Concat3 – discarded no corresponding compound pattern 

Compound nodes (all children are implicit Sequential modules) — all introduced in this work 

f EXPAND AND REDUCE 1 introduced expand ×4, inner ops, reduce back 

m REDUCE AND EXPAND 1 introduced reduce ÷4, inner ops, expand back 

a AVG AND UPSAMPLE 1 introduced global avg-pool, inner ops, upsample 

g FORK MERGE (copy, ×) 2 introduced two parallel branches; element-wise multiply 

r FORK MERGE (copy, +) 2 introduced two parallel branches; element-wise add (residual) 

o FORK MERGE (chunk, cat) 2 introduced channel-split; two branches; concate-nate 

h FORK MERGE ATTENTION 5 introduced per-head template: Q/K/V + con-nection + post 

Table 5: Node vocabulary and its relation to the original set of UniNAS nodes Tybl and Neumann (2026). 

A.3 Prefix encoding 

For illustration, we provide an example of prefix-encoded DAG following Section 3.2. The prefix string 

r f e b i a m b i . . w . b . . .

16 corresponds to the DAG                                                                  

> r<-ForkMerge(copy+add), arity 2 |-- seq_body 1<-main branch |f<-ExpandAndReduce, arity 1 |‘-- seq_body <-expanded (4C) sequential |e<-ConvDepth5x5 |b<-BatchNorm |i<-GELU |a<-AvgAndUpsample, arity 1 |‘--seq_body <-pooled sequential |m<-ReduceAndExpand, arity 1 |‘--seq_body |b<-BatchNorm |i<-GELU |.<-end (inner of m) |.<-end (inner of a) |w<-Sigmoid |.<-end (inner of f) |b<-BatchNorm [after reduce] |.<-end (main branch) ‘-- seq_body 2<-identity branch .<-end (empty) .<-end (root)

A.4 Gaussian-process surrogate and acquisition function 

Bayesian optimization (BO) (Shahriari et al., 2016; Garnett, 2023) is a sample-efficient framework for optimizing black-box objectives. It is built on two components: a surrogate model that approximates the objective from a set of evaluations, and an acquisition function that decides where to evaluate next. The surrogate is updated after every new evaluation, and the acquisition function is re-optimized at each step to propose the next candidate. This loop replaces exhaustive or random search with a principled trade-off between exploitation —querying where the surrogate predicts high values—and exploration —querying where the surrogate is uncertain. 

Surrogate: Gaussian process regression. The standard surrogate in BO is a Gaussian process (GP) (Ras-mussen and Williams, 2006). A GP defines a distribution over functions: given N observations D =

{(zi, y i)}Ni=1 , it provides, at any query point z, a posterior mean μ(z) (the best estimate of the objective) and a posterior variance σ2(z) (the model’s uncertainty about that estimate), both available in closed form: 

μ(z) = k(z)⊤ K + σ2

> n

I−1y, (7) 

σ2(z) = k(z, z ) − k(z)⊤ K + σ2

> n

I−1k(z), (8) where Kij = k(zi, z j ) is the kernel (covariance) matrix over observed inputs, k(z)i = k(zi, z ) is the vector of covariances between the observations and the query point, y = ( y1, . . . , y N )⊤ collects the observed values, and σ2 

> n

is the observational noise variance. The kernel k encodes assumptions about the objective’s smoothness and scale; its hyperparameters are set by maximizing the log marginal likelihood of D (Rasmussen and Williams, 2006). A widely used kernel family is the Matérn class, parameterized by a smoothness parameter ν, a length-scale 17 ℓ, and an output amplitude c2:

kMat´ ern (z, z ′; ν, ℓ, c 2) = c2 21−ν

Γ( ν)

√2ν ∥z − z′∥

ℓ

!ν

Kν

√2ν ∥z − z′∥

ℓ

!

, (9) where Kν is the modified Bessel function of the second kind. The special case ν = 5 /2 yields twice-differentiable sample paths and is a standard default in BO, providing a practical middle ground between the very smooth squared-exponential kernel and the rougher ν = 3 /2 variant (Snoek et al., 2012). 

Acquisition function: Expected Improvement. The acquisition function translates the GP posterior into a score for each candidate point, encoding the exploitation–exploration trade-off in a single quantity. At every BO iteration, the next evaluation point is chosen by maximizing this score over the search domain. We use Expected Improvement (EI) (Jones et al., 1998; Mockus et al., 1978), one of the most established acquisition functions. Let y∗ = max i yi denote the best value observed so far (the incumbent ). EI is defined as the expected amount by which a new evaluation at z would improve over y∗, where the expectation is taken over the GP posterior predictive distribution f (z) ∼ N  μ(z), σ 2(z):

EI( z) = E

h

max  f (z) − y∗, 0i

. (10) The max ensures that only improvements count; points predicted to be worse than the incumbent contribute zero. Because the GP posterior at z is Gaussian, this expectation can be evaluated analytically. Substituting the Gaussian density and integrating yields 

EI( z) = γ(z) Φ  u(z) + σ(z) ϕ u(z), γ(z) = μ(z) − y∗, u(z) = γ(z)

σ(z) , (11) where Φ and ϕ are the standard Gaussian CDF and PDF. The two terms have a direct interpretation: γ(z) Φ( u)

is large when the posterior mean already exceeds the incumbent ( exploitation ), while σ(z) ϕ(u) is large when the posterior uncertainty is high, so that f (z) has a chance of exceeding y∗ even if μ(z) does not ( exploration ). EI is non-negative everywhere and vanishes only where both the predicted improvement and the uncertainty are zero, making it a natural criterion for directing the search toward the most informative evaluations. 

Constrained acquisition function. When the search must respect a hard constraint on a directly computable quantity (e.g. parameter count, FLOPs, or memory footprint), we augment the acquisition function with a binary feasibility mask. Let c(z) denote a constraint function that can be evaluated exactly for any candidate z

without training, and let [ℓ, u ] be the admissible interval. The acquisition function becomes 

α(z) = EI( z) · 1 c(z) ∈ [ℓ, u ] . (12) Because c is cheap to compute exactly (e.g. counting parameters from the decoded architecture graph), no additional surrogate is needed: the mask is evaluated deterministically for every candidate proposed during acquisition-function optimization. Setting the indicator to zero outside the feasible region zeroes the acquisition function there entirely, concentrating the search on candidates that satisfy the constraint. 18