Title: SEADA: An efficient methodology for optimizing mixed-precision DNNs on multi-precision spatial architectures

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.27884v1

Published Time: Mon, 29 Jun 2026 00:37:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
> PRE-PRINT

SEADA: An efficient methodology for optimizing mixed-precision DNNs on multi-precision spatial architectures 

Leandro Fiorin ∗† 

Indipendent Researcher Groningen, The Netherlands leandro.fiorin@gmail.com 

Marco Ronzani 

Dipartimento di Elettronica e Informazione, Politecnico di Milano. Milano, Italy marco.ronzani@polimi.it 

Cristina Silvano 

Dipartimento di Elettronica e Informazione, Politecnico di Milano. Milano, Italy cristina.silvano@polimi.it 

Abstract 

Mixed-precision computation has been introduced in deep neu-ral networks (DNNs) as an effective approach to reduce latency, energy consumption, and memory footprint. However, efficiently mapping mixed-precision networks onto multi-precision spatial ar-chitectures poses several challenges. These include determining the appropriate precision for each layer, balancing layer-wise accuracy sensitivity to quantization against architectural heterogeneity and system-level constraints, and accurately estimating the system-level cost of heterogeneous precision assignments. This work presents SEADA, an efficient methodology designed to address these challenges. SEADA comprises: (i) a configurable system-level analytical cost model of a multi-precision spatial ac-celerator architecture; (ii) a fast mapping tool that identifies near-optimal mappings of DNN workloads onto the target integer accel-erator; (iii) analytical models for floating-point layers to estimate the overall benefits of mixed-precision execution; and (iv) a per-layer precision selection methodology based on bit-level entropy, enabling efficient assignment across multiple numerical precisions. SEADA’s efficiency provides designers with a robust framework for the design-space exploration of multi-precision architectures 1.

Keywords 

DNN accelerators, mixed-precision, optimization, mapping. 

1 Introduction 

The demanding energy, performance, and memory requirements of DNN workloads have driven the development of highly optimized hardware accelerators and memory subsystems. DNN training is commonly performed on GPUs with floating-point (FP) arithmetic, while inference is frequently mapped to energy-efficient hardware accelerators that employ spatial architectures and limited-precision quantized operations to minimize computation costs[ 35 ]. The ob-servation that different layers of a DNN do not require the same numerical precision to accurately represent information has moti-vated the investigation of mixed-precision systems, in which each layer can potentially operate at a different precision [ 3 , 42 ]. Effi-ciently mapping a mixed-precision network onto a multi-precision spatial architecture introduces several challenges. In particular, determining the appropriate precision for each DNN layer is a non-trivial optimization problem, as it must balance layer-wise accuracy 

∗This work was performed while at Politecnico di Milano. 

†Corresponding author 

1In this work, mixed-precision refers to DNN models with layer-wise precision varia-tions, while multi-precision denotes hardware support for multiple precisions within the accelerator. 

sensitivity to quantization with architectural heterogeneity and system-level constraints, while minimizing the overall accuracy degradation. Additional challenges include coordinating heteroge-neous compute units, managing precision-specific data paths and memory accesses, and mitigating overheads arising from precision conversions and workload imbalance [14]. As illustrated in Figure 2a, a conventional state-of-the-art work-flow for addressing this optimization problem requires three pri-mary inputs: the neural network characteristics, the target training dataset, and a performance model of the spatial architecture [ 24 , 27 ]. Based on these parameters, the workflow selects an optimal candi-date distribution for layer-wise numerical precisions. The resulting quantized network is then mapped onto the accelerator model and evaluated with respect to the chosen optimization objective (e.g., number of bit multiply–accumulate operations (bMACs), energy consumption, or execution latency). In parallel, the quantized net-work is trained for a fixed number of epochs to assess its inference accuracy. The measured accuracy, together with the corresponding cost metrics, is used to construct the Pareto frontier that character-izes the explored design space. If the termination criterion is not met, a new layer-wise precision configuration is selected and the process is iterated until convergence. For a DNN with 𝐿 layers and a pool of 𝐵 candidate precisions per layer, the total number of possible layer-wise precision configura-tions is 𝐵 𝐿 . Each of these configurations must be potentially trained to evaluate their accuracy and mapped onto the hardware accel-erator to evaluate the selected optimization metric. The mapping space itself further depends on the architecture’s parallelism and the dimensions of each layer. For example, for a ResNet-18[ 16 ], the size of the combined design and mapping space is on the order of 

O( 10 33 ) [22 ], making exhaustive exploration practically impossible. Recent research into mixed-precision optimization has explored various methodologies, including integer linear programming and heuristic searches, to determine optimal layer-wise numerical pre-cisions [ 3 , 6 , 11 , 42 ]. However, these approaches often rely on high-level proxy metrics (like bMAC counts) that ignore critical archi-tectural factors such as data movement costs, microarchitectural constraints, and mapping strategies. Furthermore, existing anal-yses frequently overlook the performance and energy overhead of (de-)quantization when low-precision layers interface with full-precision components, and the actual benefits of mixed-precision execution are often overestimated [29]. Complementary research optimizes DNN mapping and schedul-ing on spatial accelerators using brute-force, mixed-integer linear programming, or heuristics [ 18 – 20 , 22 , 24 , 26 , 30 , 34 , 37 ]. However, these methods typically assume a fixed numerical precision and 

1

> arXiv:2606.27884v1 [cs.AR] 26 Jun 2026 PRE-PRINT

Leandro Fiorin, Marco Ronzani, and Cristina Silvano 

do not directly extend to multi-precision architectures, where pre-cision heterogeneity fundamentally alters performance and data movement trade-offs. Despite prior efforts to tackle these challenges in an integrated manner [ 24 , 27 ], there is currently a lack of a unified and compre-hensive framework to address the problem in its entirety. This work presents SEADA, an efficient methodology that pro-vides a comprehensive solution to the limitations of the current state-of-the-art. Given a specific computational budget, SEADA rapidly estimates the optimal per-layer precision configuration and its associated accuracy degradation. The computational cost is determined via analytical estimates, derived from the optimal mapping of mixed-precision layers onto a target multi-precision spatial accelerator. With SEADA, we extend the state-of-the-art in several key directions: 

• We propose a template architecture for a multi-precision accelerator, enabling the analytical evaluation of execution trade-offs for mixed-precision kernels; 

• We develop analytical models for floating-point operations to estimate the overall benefits of mixed-precision execu-tion. We demonstrate that quantization overheads can be neutralized by fusing these operations directly into the coefficients of subsequent computational steps; 

• We develop a mapping tool capable of efficiently mapping mixed-precision kernels onto multi-precision spatial archi-tectures, explicitly accounting for operands’ precision in computation and data movement; 

• We extend an existing per-layer precision selection method-ology based on bit-level entropy enabling fast precision assignment that requires only a single fine-tuning phase of the resulting mixed-precision network. These contributions enable SEADA to efficiently address the tar-get optimization problem, providing designers with a robust frame-work for the design-space exploration of multi-precision architec-tures. To demonstrate its utility, we present a holistic exploration study that jointly optimizes the accelerator memory hierarchy, pre-cision selection, and objective metrics. A key insight from this study is that once the DNN accuracy degradation is characterized relative to the layer-wise precision distribution, a simple metric based on the number of bMACs of the DNN model is sufficient to estimate hardware-level accuracy. Consequently, we introduce the Compu-tational Bit Reduction (CBR) metric, a hardware-agnostic proxy for accuracy degradation. Since CBR depends solely on layer entropy, it requires only a single evaluation across all explored architectural configurations. This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides relevant background about quantization and mixed-precision computations. Section 3 discusses the several components of SEADA. Section 4 presents experimental evaluations of the methodology, while Sec-tion 5 discusses its use in a design-exploration flow. Section 6 dis-cusses related work, while Section 7 concludes the paper with final remarks. 

2 Background 2.1 Quantization methods and computations 

When designing quantized neural network systems, several orthog-onal design choices must be considered, each influencing numerical precision, hardware efficiency, and model accuracy. Quantization can be uniform or non-uniform , symmetric or asym-metric , and static or dynamic . Uniform quantization applies evenly spaced quantization levels across the value range, while non-uniform schemes allocate levels unevenly to better match data distributions at the cost of increased complexity. Symmetric quantization centers the quantization grid around zero with identical positive and nega-tive ranges, while asymmetric quantization introduces a non-zero offset to better capture skewed values. Static quantization deter-mines scale and zero-point parameters ahead of inference (e.g., from calibration data), whereas dynamic quantization computes them on the fly. Depending on accuracy and computation simplicity goals, different choices can be adopted. In the case of low-precision quantization, an optimal choice appears the adoption of uniform symmetric static quantization for weights and uniform asymmetric static quantization for activations, where the quantization ranges are predetermined by analyzing the weights in one case, and by analyzing the range of activations for different batches, in the latter case[3, 12]. Quantization constrains DNN operands to a discrete set of repre-sentable values, defined by a mapping of real numbers to integers. This process can be expressed as in Equation 1, where Q(·) denotes the quantization operator, 𝑟 is a real-valued weight or activation, 

𝑆 𝑟 is a real-valued scaling factor, and 𝑧 𝑟 is the zero point selected to ensure that the real value 0 is mapped exactly to an integer, equal to zero in case of symmetric quantization. The operator Int (·) 

converts a floating-point value to an integer via a chosen rounding rule (e.g., round-to-nearest or truncation). 

𝑄 (𝑟 ) = 𝑟 𝑞 = Int 

 𝑟 𝑆 𝑟 



− 𝑧 𝑟 (1) 

De-quantization DQ (·) , reconstructs an approximate full-precision representation of the quantized value and can be expressed as: 

𝑟 ≈ 𝐷𝑄 (𝑟 𝑞 ) = 𝑆 𝑟 FP (𝑟 𝑞 + 𝑧 𝑟 ) (2) 

where the operator FP (·) converts an integer value into floating-point representation. For the sake of clarity, the zero-point 𝑧 𝑟 is neglected in the subsequent formulations. Nevertheless, it is fully accounted for in the actual implementation of our analytical models. The choice of the scaling parameter 𝑆 𝑟 is commonly determined by analyzing the dynamic range of the tensor to be quantized, either by using the maximum absolute value in symmetric quantization or by computing the minimum and maximum values in asymmetric quantization. In post-training quantization (PTQ) approaches, these statistics are typically collected from a representative calibration dataset, whereas in quantization-aware training (QAT) they may be gathered or refined during training[ 14 , 43 , 44 ]. These range estimates define the interval that is mapped onto the available discrete quantization levels. For very low numerical precision, such methods often become suboptimal because they fail to adapt to the network’s optimization dynamics and loss landscape. In this regime, learned-quantizer methods, such as Learned Step Size Quantization (LSQ)[ 12 ], provide a more effective quantization-aware training 

2PRE-PRINT 

SEADA: An efficient methodology for optimizing mixed-precision DNNs on multi-precision spatial architectures 

alternative. By treating the scale parameter 𝑆 𝑟 as a trainable variable for a specific weight group (typically per-layer or per-channel), these methods jointly optimize the quantizer alongside the network weights, allowing the model to adapt precisely to quantization sensitivity, significantly improving accuracy under aggressive low-bitwidth constraints. Building on these advantages, our work adopts the LSQ approach, specifically utilizing channel-wise learned scale parameters for weights and layer-wise parameters for activations .This hybrid configuration balances the granular precision needed to capture weight distribution variance across channels with the computational efficiency of a single scale factor for activation maps. Quantized operands are mostly used in DNNs to reduce computa-tion costs of kernels implementing vector-matrix or matrix-matrix multiplication. Considering a layer with hidden activations ℎ and a weight tensor 𝑊 , their multiplication (convolution) can be ex-pressed in terms of their respective quantized values as ℎ𝑞 and 

𝑊 𝑞 :

𝑎 = 𝑆 𝑊 𝑆 ℎ 𝐹 𝑃 (𝑊 𝑞 ∗ ℎ𝑞 ) (3) 

where 𝑆 ℎ and 𝑆 𝑊 are the real-valued quantization scales of ℎ and 

𝑊 , respectively. The term 𝑊 𝑞 ∗ ℎ𝑞 represents the matrix multiplica-tion (or convolution) carried out entirely in low-precision integer arithmetic with accumulation performed in INT32. This intermediate result 𝑎 can be subsequently re-quantized before being forwarded to the next layer: 

𝑎 𝑞 = Int 

 𝑎 𝑆 𝑎 



= Int 

 𝑆 𝑊 𝑆 ℎ

𝑆 𝑎 

𝐹 𝑃 (𝑊 𝑞 ∗ ℎ𝑞 )



(4) 

where 𝑆 𝑎 is the precomputed scaling factor for the output activa-tions. 

2.2 Layer precision selection 

The basic idea behind the use of mixed-precision quantization is based on the intuition that different layers in a network have dif-ferent sensitivity to quantization and hence some layers are better candidates for more aggressive quantization than others[ 3, 6 , 42 ]. Under the assumption that layer-wise accuracy estimates can be combined linearly to determine overall network accuracy[ 3 ], the problem of selecting the optimal precision for each layer can be formulated either as maximizing the total network accuracy or min-imizing the accuracy perturbation due to the use of lower precision layers, while constraining computational costs (e.g., latency, num-ber of bMACs, energy). The problem is usually solved using Integer Linear Programming (ILP), or by formulating the optimization as a Multiple-Choice Knapsack Problem[3, 6, 42]. Our methodology leverages the Entropy Approximation Guided Layer selection (EAGL) strategy proposed in [ 3]. Given a set of candidate precisions 𝐵 = {𝑏 0, 𝑏 1 }, EAGL formulates the optimiza-tion as a 0-1 Knapsack Problem. The objective is to maximize the cumulative accuracy gain Í𝐿 𝑙 =1 𝐺 𝑙 𝑃 𝑙 subject to a total computational budget 𝑇 :maximize 

𝐿 ∑︁ 

𝑙 =1

𝐺 𝑙 𝑃 𝑙 subject to 

𝐿 ∑︁ 

𝑙 =1

𝐶 𝑙 ≤ 𝑇 

In this formulation, 𝐺 𝑙 represents the estimated accuracy gain from maintaining layer 𝑙 at the higher precision 𝑏 1, while 𝑃 𝑙 is a binary indicator variable ( 𝑃 𝑙 = 1 for high precision 𝑏 1, and 0 otherwise). 

𝐶 𝑙 denotes the computational cost of layer 𝑙 , and 𝑇 is the global 

(a) 

(b) 

Figure 1: DNN computational models: (a) BERT-base for ques-tion answering and (b) ResNet-50. Green boxes highlight com-putations executed using low-precision integer operands, while blue boxes denote computations performed in full floating-point precision. 

budget constraint expressed as an integer. To quantify 𝐺 𝑙 with-out exhaustive search, EAGL uses empirical layer entropy as a proxy for quantization sensitivity. For a model pre-quantized at 

𝑏 0, EAGL maps weights to 2𝑏 discrete bins to evaluate the neces-sity of a higher precision, 𝑏 1. High entropy, resulting from weights distributed evenly across bins, indicates a benefit from increased precision. Conversely, low entropy signifies weight concentration, suggesting the layer’s transformation can be represented more compactly at a lower bit-width. Given the vector 𝑤 of 𝑛 trained parameters of layer 𝑙 quantized at precision 𝑏 , the empirical entropy for each layer is computed as 𝐻 ( ˆ𝑝 𝑏 𝑙 ) = − Í𝑐 ˆ𝑝 𝑏 𝑙 (𝑐 )𝑙𝑜𝑔 ( ˆ𝑝 𝑏 𝑙 (𝑐 )) , where the empirical probability distribution for each discrete value |𝑐 | ≤ 2𝑏 is computed as ˆ𝑝 𝑏 𝑙 (𝑐 ) =

1

𝑛 

Í 1𝑐 (𝑤 𝑖 ), with 1𝑐 (𝑤 𝑖 ) equal to 1 if 𝑤 𝑖 = 𝑐 , and 0 otherwise. Unlike other approaches, EAGL requires only a single pre-trained model quantized at precision 𝑏 to estimate parameter distributions. While this may occasionally yield suboptimal precision assign-ments, it is orders of magnitude faster than alternative methods [ 3]. This efficiency makes EAGL an ideal candidate for integration into comprehensive estimation methodologies. 

2.3 Floating-point layers in DNN models 

Figure 1 outlines the comprehensive computational pipelines of the two DNN models selected in this work as use-cases: a BERT-base language model fine tuned for question-answering [ 10 ], and a ResNet-50 CNN [ 16 ]. For clarity, the figure focuses on the sequential processing stages and omits residual (skip) connections. The BERT-base architecture consists of twelve transformer blocks. Each block sequentially computes the Query, Key, and Value matri-ces (QKV), followed by Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) and an attention output projection (Att.o). These operations are supported by Layer Normalization (LayerNorm - LN1, LN2), intermediate and output Feed-Forward Networks (FFN.i, FFN.o), and Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU) activation functions. The pipeline concludes with a specialized layer for the question-answering (QA) task. The ResNet-50 model features a backbone of interleaved convo-lutional and Batch Normalization (BatchNorm - BN) layers, culmi-nating in a final Fully Connected (FC) layer for classification. 

3PRE-PRINT 

Leandro Fiorin, Marco Ronzani, and Cristina Silvano 

(a) 

(b) 

Figure 2: (a) Overview of a state-of-the-art framework for the joint optimization of hardware performance and inference accuracy in DNN spatial accelerators; (b) Overview of the main components of the proposed SEADA methodology. 

In Figure 1, green boxes denote low-precision integer opera-tions offloaded to accelerators, while blue boxes represent full-precision floating-point steps. This simulated quantization approach [ 23 ] stores parameters as integers but performs only a subset of arithmetic in the integer domain. Consequently, data must be de-quantized for floating-point operations and re-quantized for subse-quent low-precision stages. Prior research has explored uniform integer execution for BERT [23 ] and fully integer mixed-precision for CNNs [ 42 ]. However, the ability of these techniques to maintain accuracy under very low-precision constraints remains unproven. Consequently, this work focuses on simulated quantization, leaving fully integer mixed-precision models for future investigation. 

3 SEADA 

This section describes SEADA, a methodology for efficiently explor-ing the design space of mixed-precision neural networks deployed on multi-precision accelerators. SEADA integrates several key com-ponents: (i) a configurable system-level analytical cost model of a multi-precision spatial accelerator architecture; (ii) a fast mapping tool that identifies near-optimal mappings of DNN workloads onto the target integer accelerator; (iii) analytical models for floating-point layers to estimate the overall benefits of mixed-precision exe-cution; and (iv)a per-layer precision selection methodology based on bit-level entropy, enabling efficient assignment across multiple numerical precisions. Figure 2b illustrates the interaction among the different com-ponents of the proposed methodology. An EAGL-based approach is employed to determine the per-layer precision configuration of 

Figure 3: Target spatial accelerator architecture template. 

the quantized network. The precision selection process takes as inputs: (i) a library of cost estimates for each network layer and pre-cision, generated by the mapping tool; (ii) the allowed cost budget; and (iii) entropy measures computed from checkpoints obtained by pre-training the network at uniform precisions. Once the per-layer precision configuration is determined, the resulting mixed-precision network is fine tuned to evaluate the corresponding accuracy, while the comprehensive computational cost is estimated using the analytical model. This approach yields an optimal or near-optimal solution without requiring iterative exploration over multiple per-layer precision configurations, in contrast to the iterative workflow illustrated in Figure 2a. We detail in the following subsections the main SEADA compo-nents. 

3.1 Multi-precision performance model 

To estimate the cost of implementing mixed-precision quantization, we introduced a system-level analytical model of a multi-precision spatial accelerator template designed for the execution of DNN workloads. The proposed model is grounded in existing accelerator architectures and abstracts key architectural features relevant to performance and energy analysis[1, 7, 26, 28]. Figure 3 illustrates the generic spatial accelerator template. The architecture comprises an array of processing elements (PEs), each equipped with local register files (RF) for storing input and out-put operands, a global buffer (GB), off-chip main memory, and an on-chip network (NoC) that interconnects all components. The ac-celerator buffers are assumed to support double buffering to enable overlap of computation and data movement. Additionally, PEs can be organized into multiple levels of physical clustering to expose different degrees of spatial parallelism. Each PE features a configurable functional unit (FU) support-ing mixed-precision computation, based on state-of-the-art de-signs [ 1, 15 , 28 ]. Following [ 28 ], the FU assumes decoupled pipelines for floating-point and fixed-point arithmetic, which can be indepen-dently optimized for energy efficiency. While Figure 3 shows both pipelines within each PE, our analytical model is flexible and easily adapted to alternative configurations, such as shared or centralized resources. We assume a functional unit with 32-bit-wide input and output ports. For the floating-point pipeline, we model support for FP32, 

4PRE-PRINT 

SEADA: An efficient methodology for optimizing mixed-precision DNNs on multi-precision spatial architectures 

FP16, FP8, and FP4 arithmetic[ 5 , 21 , 25 , 36 ]. For the fixed-point pipeline, we incorporated models for computation in INT8, INT4, and INT2[13, 28], with INT32 accumulation. Both pipelines support fused multiply-add instructions (FMA). In the case of the floating-point pipeline, when selecting 32 bit precision, the engine performs a single FMA. When using a smaller quantization 𝑄 , the 32-bit lane is partitioned in 𝑃 = 32 /𝑄 operands, and the engine performs a Í𝑃 𝐴 𝑖 · 𝐵 𝑖 + 𝐶 instruction. Similarly, in the case of the fixed-point pipeline, the processing element can be programmed to perform any between four INT8 FMAs, eight INT4 FMAs, or sixteen INT2 FMAs in parallel, while accumulating com-putation results in the INT32 format. We consider the multipliers of the floating and fixed point engines to be implemented with dif-ferent numbers of pipeline stages [ 28 ]. As the targeted algorithms are significantly parallel, threads can be scheduled to minimize the influence of data dependency and achieve, ideally, a throughput of one instruction per cycle [ 13 ]. The template components are auto-matically instantiated depending on the precision requirements of the use cases targeted during the design-space exploration, together with the proper adder tree, accumulator data width and input and output operands packing. As DNN workloads require more than just FMA operations, our floating-point pipeline models a broader instruction set, including basic arithmetic and data type conversions (omitted from Figure 3 for simplicity) [13, 38]. 

3.2 Mapping tool for convolution and GEMM 

We leverage the QuickFlow mapping tool [ 34 ] to evaluate both performance and cost of mixed-precision convolutional and general matrix–matrix multiplication (GEMM) kernels. QuickFlow optimizes DNN mappings (convolutions and GEMM) onto hierarchical spatial accelerators using an iterative local search. By evaluating candidates through an analytical, activity-based cost model, validated against Timeloop [ 30 , 33 ] and integrated with Accelergy [ 41 ], it navigates tilings and dataflows to minimize la-tency and energy. It represents architectures as hierarchical trees, from leaf-level arithmetic units to DRAM, allowing for automated topology inference and optimal resource scheduling. QuickFlow’s mapping exploration typically assumes a uniform precision for all computations and data transfers within a single run. While the tool can optimize individual layers at different precisions, it treats each as a distinct architectural baseline. Consequently, it cannot accurately model hardware flexibility or the specific performance characteristics of multi-precision processing elements operating within a unified system. To address these limitations, we extended the baseline Quick-Flow implementation by explicitly modeling the Í𝑖 𝐴 𝑖 · 𝐵 𝑖 + 𝐶 

operation executed at reduced precision as a cluster of 𝑃 FMA units, with final accumulation performed at INT32 precision. Spa-tial mapping constraints are imposed on this cluster, such that each low-precision functional unit is restricted from accumulating par-tial sums corresponding to different output feature-map locations or different output channels. Supporting multi-precision execution further required extending the modeling of precision-dependent adder reduction trees and partial-result accumulation, as well as accurately capturing the packing and unpacking of input and out-put data as they are transferred across the different levels of the memory hierarchy. 

3.3 Floating-point layer models 

To holistically evaluate mixed-precision execution, we developed activity-based analytical models for the floating-point stages (blue boxes, Figure 1). These models estimate component-level activ-ity and scale it by the cost per operation, following established methodologies [30, 34, 41]. For BERT-base (MHSA, GELU, LayerNorm) and ResNet-50 (Batch-Norm), floating-point stages often utilize Special Function Units (SFUs) for complex operations like exponentiation, division, and trigonometric functions. While precise cost estimation requires spe-cific hardware and kernel-level details, we approximate these costs by decomposing the kernels into equivalent sequences of simpler floating-point operations, following state-of-the-art algorithms and approximations commonly used in optimized DNN libraries [ 2 , 38 ]. In our evaluation, we analytically demonstrate that the overhead associated with implementing the quantization and de-quantization of accelerated layers can be minimized by fusing these operations into the coefficients of subsequent floating-point computation steps. An additional, albeit simple, yet important observation is that the computational cost of these fused kernels marginally depend on the numerical precision used in the preceding and subsequent layer. Consequently, the accelerated layers can be optimized indepen-dently of these operations. 

3.3.1 Multi-Head Self-Attention. The Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) layers in BERT (Figure 1a) capture contextual dependencies between all tokens in a sequence. By operating multiple heads in parallel, the model explores diverse representational subspaces to identify various relationship types. The resulting aggregated outputs provide the context-aware representations essential for complex language understanding. By fusing the de-quantization and quantization steps directly into the MHSA computation, the resulting operation can be expressed as: 

𝑎 𝑀𝐻 𝑆𝐴 𝑞 = 𝑄 (𝑆𝑀 ( 𝑄 𝑚 ∗ 𝐾 𝑇 𝑚 √︁ 

(𝑑 𝑚 ) ) ∗ 𝑉 𝑚 )

= Int 𝑆𝑀 ( 𝑆 𝑄 𝑆 𝐾 √︁ 

(𝑑 𝑚 ) 𝐹 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑞 ) ∗ 𝐹 𝑃 (𝐾 𝑇 𝑞 ) ) ∗ 𝑆 𝑉 

𝑆 𝑎 

𝐹 𝑃 (𝑉 𝑞 )

!

= Int 



𝑆𝑀 (𝜔 0𝐹 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑞 ) ∗ 𝐹 𝑃 (𝐾 𝑇 𝑞 ) ) ∗ 𝜔 1𝐹 𝑃 (𝑉 𝑞 )



(5) 

where 𝑆𝑀 (·) denotes the softmax function, 𝑄 𝑚 , 𝐾 𝑚 , and 𝑉 𝑚 de-note the per-head partitions of the Query, Key, and Value matrices, respectively, and 𝑑 𝑚 is the corresponding scaling factor. The param-eters 𝜔 0 and 𝜔 1 are precomputed constants, while all remaining terms follow the notation introduced previously. The computational efficiency of MHSA is primarily limited by the memory bandwidth required for large intermediate matrices. FlashAttention-2 [ 8] mitigates this by using tiled access to 𝑄, 𝐾, 

and 𝑉 matrices and fusing attention operations into a single kernel. By implementing an online softmax, it avoids materializing inter-mediate scores, reducing memory traffic and improving memory complexity from quadratic to linear relative to sequence length. We adapted the FlashAttention-2 algorithm to the specific con-straints of our target architecture and parallelized the computation 

5PRE-PRINT 

Leandro Fiorin, Marco Ronzani, and Cristina Silvano 

across the DNN sequence length, assigning each processing ele-ment to execute the fused attention kernel for a single input token. This approach enables an analytical model that precisely captures memory access patterns across the hierarchy, accounting for data movement between local registers, shared memory, and global stor-age. To evaluate the cost of the fused kernel, expressed in our case as 𝑠𝑜 𝑓 𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 (𝜔 0𝐹 𝑃 (𝑄 𝑞 ) ∗ 𝐹 𝑃 (𝐾 𝑇 𝑞 )) ∗ 𝜔 1𝐹 𝑃 (𝑉 𝑞 ), we derive the num-ber and types of floating-point operations required to implement the online softmax computation described in [ 8 ]. Specifically, our analysis accounts for the polynomial approximation of the expo-nential function proposed in [ 4], as well as three iterations of the Newton–Raphson method to compute the reciprocal of the softmax normalization term using only multiplications and additions [31]. 

3.3.2 GELU. The Gaussian Error Linear Unit (GELU) layer in the BERT-base model serves as a smooth, non-monotonic activation function. It introduces non-linearity by scaling the input based on its cumulative distribution function. The GELU approximation employed in Hugging Face’s BERT implementation is expressed as 

𝐺𝐸𝐿𝑈 (𝑥 ) = 𝑘 0𝑥 (1+𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ (𝑘 1 (𝑥 +𝑘 2𝑥 3)) , with 𝑘 0 = 0.5, 𝑘 1 =√︁ (2/𝜋 ),and 𝑘 2 = 0.044715 [40 ]. By fusing de-quantization, GELU, and quantization into a single expression, the resulting operation can be written as: 

𝑎 𝐺𝐸𝐿𝑈 𝑞 = 𝑄 (𝐺𝐸𝐿𝑈 (𝐷𝑄 (ℎ𝑞 ) ) 

= Int 



𝑘 ′

0𝐹 𝑃 (ℎ𝑞 ) ( 1 + 𝑡𝑎𝑛ℎ (𝑘 ′

1 (𝐹 𝑃 (ℎ𝑞 ) + 𝑘 ′

2𝐹 𝑃 (ℎ𝑞 )3 )

 (6) 

where 𝑘 ′

0 = 𝑘 0𝑆 ℎ /𝑆 𝑎 , 𝑘 ′

1 = 𝑘 1𝑆 ℎ , and 𝑘 ′

2 = 𝑘 2𝑆 2

ℎ .Since tanh (𝑧 ) can be expressed as tanh (𝑧 ) = 1 − 2/( exp (2𝑧 ) + 

1), we model the analytical cost of the GELU implementation by leveraging the same polynomial approximation of the exponential function adopted for the softmax computation [ 4], together with three iterations of the Newton–Raphson method to compute the reciprocal of the denominator[31]. The memory access patterns associated to the execution of the GELU function are straightforward to derive, as it is applied point-wise on each activation value, while the parameters 𝑘 ′

0, 𝑘 ′

1, and 𝑘 ′

2

are precomputed constants shared across all activations. 

3.3.3 Layer Normalization. Layer Normalization (LayerNorm) sta-bilizes hidden state dynamics by normalizing activations across the feature dimension for each sequence element. By computing the mean 𝜇 and variance 𝜎 2 independently for each token’s hid-den tensor across dimension 𝐻 , it ensures consistent normaliza-tion regardless of batch size or sequence length. This facilitates smoother gradient flow and significantly accelerates pre-training convergence. The LayerNorm is typically formulated as: 

𝑦 = ℎ − 𝜇 

√𝜎 2 + 𝜖 ⊙ 𝛾 + 𝛽 (7) 

where 𝛾 and 𝛽 are vectors of dimension 𝐻 of learnable parameters that are shared with by each token of the sequence length and batch. The computation of LayerNorm is typically carried out in two stages. First, Welford’s online algorithm[ 39 ] is used to compute the running mean and sum of squared deviations in a single pass over the input data. Second, the remaining normalization, scaling, and shifting operations are fused into a single computation. When de-quantization, LayerNorm, and quantization are fused, the resulting expressions for the mean and variance can be written as: 

𝜇 ≈ 1

𝐻 

𝐻 ∑︁ 

𝑖 =1

𝑆 ℎ 𝐹 𝑃 (ℎ𝑞 ) = 𝑆 ℎ 𝜇 ′ (8) 

𝜎 2 ≈ 1

𝐻 

𝐻 ∑︁ 

𝑖 =1

(𝑆 ℎ 𝐹 𝑃 (ℎ𝑞 ) − 𝑆 ℎ 𝜇 ′ )2 = 𝑆 2

ℎ𝜎 ′2 (9) 

The overall fused operation can be described by the formula: 

𝑎 𝐿𝑁 𝑞 = Int ©«

𝑆 ℎ 𝐹 𝑃 (ℎ𝑞 ) − 𝑆 ℎ 𝜇 ′√︃ 

𝑆 2

ℎ𝜎 ′2 + 𝜖 

⊙ 𝛾 𝑆 𝑎 

+ 𝛽 𝑆 𝑎 

ª®®¬

= Int 𝐹 𝑃 (ℎ𝑞 ) − 𝜇 ′

√𝜎 ′2 + 𝜖 ′ ⊙ 𝛾 ′ + 𝛽 ′

! (10) 

where 𝛾 ′

= 𝛾 /𝑆 𝑎 , 𝛽 ′

= 𝛽 /𝑆 𝑎 , and 𝜖 ′

can be chosen small enough to satisfy the floating-point precision requirements to ensure numeri-cal stability. To model the cost of the LayerNorm, we consider the same two computing steps used in optimized libraries and parallelization along the sequence length’s tokens. The normalization requires computing the reciprocal of the modified standard deviation, which we approximate using three iterations of the Newton–Raphson method [31]. Since the second stage is performed point-wise on the activation data and shares the precomputed scaling and bias terms 𝛾 ′ and 𝛽 ′,the corresponding memory access patterns are straightforward to derive. 

3.3.4 Batch Normalization. Batch Normalization (BatchNorm) sta-bilizes and accelerates CNN’s training by normalizing layer inputs to mitigate Internal Covariate Shift, preventing saturation and al-lowing for higher learning rates[ 16 ]. Taking Figure 1b as reference, the de-quantization, batch normalization, and quantization steps of a quantized hidden tensor ℎ𝑞 can be fused into a modified Batch-Norm layer, as described by Equation 11: 

𝑎 𝐵𝑁 𝑞 = 𝑄 (𝐵𝑁 (𝐷𝑄 (ℎ𝑞 ) ) ) = Int 

 𝐵𝑁 (𝑆 ℎ 𝐹 𝑃 (ℎ𝑞 ) ) 

𝑆 𝑎 



= Int 



𝛾 ( 𝑆 ℎ 𝐹 𝑃 (ℎ𝑞 ) − 𝜇 𝑆 𝑎 

√𝜎 2 + 𝜖 ) + 𝛽 𝑆 𝑎 



= Int  𝛼 0𝐹 𝑃 (ℎ𝑞 ) + 𝛼 1

 (11) 

where 𝐵𝑁 (·) implements BatchNorm. The parameters 𝜇 and 𝜎 2

represent the mean and variance computed during training along the batch and the spatial dimensions, while 𝛽 and 𝛾 are the trainable affine parameters of the BatchNorm layer. By abstracting away data type conversions, the operation expressed in Equation 11 can be modeled as a sequence of point-wise FMA operations between the activation values and the 𝛼 0 and 𝛼 1 coefficients, which are constant and precomputed for all elements within the same batch. This computation is readily parallelizable across the floating-point processing elements. However, it exhibits low arithmetic intensity, since activation values are consumed only once with no reuse. 

3.4 Layer-wise precision selection 

SEADA aims to find an optimal precision distribution that maxi-mizes model accuracy within specific computational, memory, or 

6PRE-PRINT 

SEADA: An efficient methodology for optimizing mixed-precision DNNs on multi-precision spatial architectures 

energy constraints. In mixed-precision settings, the combinatorial expansion of the search space often necessitates meta-heuristics like Genetic Algorithms or Reinforcement Learning [ 24 , 27 ]. How-ever, these methods are frequently computationally intractable for large-scale architectures, as the cumulative overhead of evaluating the accuracy of each candidate, even with shortened fine-tuning, is prohibitively expensive. To navigate the design space efficiently, we implement an ex-ploration strategy based on the EAGL approach [ 3 ]. We quantify computational overhead using the analytical cost model from Sec-tion 3.2, focusing exclusively on quantized layers since floating-point costs remain mostly constant across all configurations. To maximize efficiency, we pre-compute metrics for all possible layer-wise precisions into a library of optimal mappings. This allows SEADA to rapidly estimate total costs via look-up table aggrega-tion, decoupling the search process from model execution. We extended the original EAGL methodology to be able to select from more than two precisions by using a step approach. Taking as example the case of three precisions 𝑏 0, 𝑏 1, and 𝑏 2, with 𝑏 0 >

𝑏 1 > 𝑏 2, we evaluate the layer entropy for a network trained with 

𝑏 0 and use the obtained values to selected the layers to which to assign the precision 𝑏 1 until the computational budget is equal to the one obtained using 𝑏 1 for all layers. For lower computational budget, we use instead as reference entropy the one computed for a network trained at precision 𝑏 1.We also evaluated an alternative approach by modeling the pre-cision assignment problem as a Multi-Choice Knapsack Problem, jointly considering the layer entropies for precisions 𝑏 0 and 𝑏 1.However, this method yielded inferior results, particularly under less restrictive computational budgets (results omitted for brevity). Given the precomputed metrics, a bucket of precisions to be chosen from, and the computed layer entropy, SEADA automates the bit-width allocation by treating each layer’s precision as a se-lectable item with an associated cost (the precomputed metric) and expected benefit (the entropy, as proxy for the accuracy). Unlike exhaustive search methods, this approach provides a deterministic and fast solution to the precision-assignment problem. To ensure consistency, activation tensors shared across multiple layers constrain those layers to a uniform precision. These layers are grouped into a single logical unit, where the total computational cost and accuracy gain are the aggregate sums of its constituent layers’ metrics. After finalizing the optimal configuration, we generate a mixed-precision PyTorch model by automatically modifying pre-trained architectures from repositories like Torchvision or Hugging Face. This involves a layer-wise substitution where standard linear and convolutional layers are replaced with specialized modules utilizing Learned Step Size Quantization. We estimate the final accuracy of the generated mixed-precision model by fine-tuning it using Knowledge Distillation [ 17 ] with the original full-precision model acting as a teacher network to guide the optimization of the quantized student model. This pro-cess ensures high fidelity to the original performance, even under significant bit-depth constraints. 

4 SEADA evaluation 

This section evaluates the proposed SEADA methodology. As noted in Section 6, a direct comparison with state-of-the-art solutions is precluded by the absence of prior works that address the opti-mization problem holistically. Furthermore, reproducing previous experiments is hindered by a lack of access to specific training hyperparameters and DNN model configurations used in those studies. 

4.1 Experimental setup 

4.1.1 Reference spatial architecture. In our experiments, we adopted the Eyeriss spatial architecture [ 7 ] as a reference platform, from which we derived system-level architectural characteristics, in-cluding the memory hierarchy, the number of PEs, and the basic dataflow. Following [ 28 ], each PE is composed of both an integer pipeline and a floating-point pipeline. The multi-precision func-tional unit within the integer pipeline was modeled as described in Section 3.1. We configured 168 PEs, each equipped with indepen-dent 1.66 KB register file sets, covering inputs, weights, and outputs, for both the integer and floating-point pipelines. The system also includes a 128 KB Global Buffer and LPDDR4 DRAM. Latency and energy models for the integer pipeline, memory components, and interconnection network were generated using Accelergy [ 41 ], in a manner consistent with the methodologies adopted by QuickFlow and Timeloop [ 30 ], and assuming a 32nm technology node and a clock rate of 1 GHz. For our experiments, the floating-point pipeline was limited to FP32 operands, consistent with the accuracy evalu-ation setup. Energy, performance, and area characteristics of the floating-point components were similarly derived using Accelergy. For the low-precision kernels, we created the cost library by running the mapper with the objective of minimizing for each pre-cision the layers’ energy-delay product (EDP). The execution of the floating-point kernels were parallelized over the available PEs, as described in Section 3.3. In particular, as the efficiency of the Multi-Head Self-Attention strictly depends on the number of available PEs and on the size of the matrix tiles used in the computation of the FlashAttention-2 algorithm, we performed a exhaustive design-space exploration to find the configuration minimizing the EDP of the layer. 

4.1.2 DNN models pre-training. We evaluated two representative benchmarks: a natural language question-answering task based on BERT-base [ 10 ], and an image classification task based on ResNet-50 [ 16 ]. The BERT-base model was obtained from the Hugging Face Transformers library [ 40 ] and fine tuned on the SQuAD 1.1 bench-mark [ 32 ]. The ResNet-50 model was adapted from the PyTorch Model Zoo and trained on the ImageNet dataset [9]. Both networks were first trained at full precision to serve as teacher models for the knowledge distillation procedure employed during the training of their low-precision counterparts. To compute the entropy metrics used for selecting the optimal precision distri-bution, we trained reference models in which all variable-precision layers were uniformly set to either 8 bits or 4 bits. Following com-mon practice in quantized neural network design [ 3 , 45 ], the first and last layers of each low-precision model were fixed at 8-bit precision. 

7PRE-PRINT 

Leandro Fiorin, Marco Ronzani, and Cristina Silvano 

(a) (b) (c) 

Figure 4: BERT-base: (a) Achieved fined-tuned accuracy for different energy budgets with respect to an uniform 8-bit implemen-tation of the accelerated kernels; (b) Normalized EDP of comprehensive model for different distributions of layers’ precision; (c) Normalized comprehensive energy broken down in terms of the layer type. 

We trained the BERT-base models for 60 epochs using a LAMB optimizer, an initial learning rate of 5 × 10 −5, a weight decay of 

1 × 10 −2, and a batch size of 192. The 8-bit model ResNet-50 was trained for 40 epochs using a SGD optimizer, a momentum of 0.9, a weight decay of 1 × 10 −4, an initial learning rate of 1 × 10 −3 with cosine learning-rate decay, and a batch size of 128. For the 4-bit ResNet-50 model, we increased the initial learning rate to 1 × 10 −2,and used a weight decay of 2.5 × 10 −05 . All models were fine tuned using knowledge distillation, with a temperature of one and equal weighting between the standard task loss and the distillation loss. 

4.1.3 Mixed-precision models fine tuning. The variable-precision layers of the mixed-precision models were allowed to operate at 8, 4, or 2 bits. We initialized the mixed-precision models from the optimal 4-bit checkpoints and fine tuned them using the same train-ing configuration adopted for the 4-bit models, for an additional maximum number of epochs equal to 60 for BERT, and to 40 for ResNet-50, and using three different seeds. To provide a stable initialization for further training, the learned quantization scale factors were multiplied by four for layers whose precision was reduced from 4 bits to 2 bits, while they were left unchanged for layers operating at 8-bit or 4-bit precision. For all experimental tasks, we evaluated the optimal layer-wise precision distributions by constraining the total cost metric to a fraction of the baseline configuration in which all quantized layers operate at 8-bit precision. We conducted experiments using energy as the cost metric provided to the Knapsack-based optimization algorithm. For BERT, we evaluated energy budgets ranging from 65% down to 35% of the 8-bit baseline in 5% increments. For ResNet-50, we explored budgets from 75% to 45% of the baseline using 10% steps. 

4.2 Experimental results 

4.2.1 BERT-base. Figure 4a illustrates the accuracy versus energy-saving trade-offs achieved by applying our methodology to BERT-base, excluding the energy consumption of floating-point layers. For energy budgets above 45%, the accuracy loss remains within 1% of 

Figure 5: Normalized comprehensive energy broken down for architectural components, for BERT-base blocks and layers. Results are normalized to the energy consumption of the initial QKV layers. Precision values are reported exclusively for the accelerated layers of the model. 

the full-precision baseline; however, accuracy degrades significantly as the energy budget is further constrained. Figure 4b compares the normalized EDP across the comprehen-sive network model, including both accelerated and floating-point layers. The comparison evaluates layer acceleration at 2, 4, and 8 bits alongside the mixed-precision networks selected for the seven en-ergy budgets. The EDP reduction observed at lower precisions stems from decreased energy consumption, minimized data movement within accelerated kernels, and reduced latency during compute-intensive operations. The EDP reduction with respect to the 8-bit configuration spans from 30% for the 65% mixed-precision solu-tion to 59% for the 35% configuration. Specifically, the 45% mixed-precision solution achieves a 48% EDP reduction relative to the 8-bit baseline and a 97% reduction compared to the full-precision implementation. Figure 4c illustrates the normalized energy consumption for various precision distributions, categorized by BERT layer types: accelerated low-precision matrix multiplications (Quant), MHSA, 

8PRE-PRINT 

SEADA: An efficient methodology for optimizing mixed-precision DNNs on multi-precision spatial architectures 

(a) (b) (c) 

Figure 6: ResNet-50: (a) Achieved fined-tuned accuracy for different energy budgets with respect to an uniform 8-bit implemen-tation of the accelerated kernels; (b) Normalized EDP of comprehensive model for different distributions of layers’ precision; (c) Normalized comprehensive energy broken down in terms of the layer type. 

LayerNorm (LN), and GELU. Once the compute kernels are quan-tized, the MHSA computation dominates the total energy profile, aligning with the FlashAttention-2 acceleration results reported in [ 8 , 38 ]. Overall energy savings with respect to the 8-bit config-uration range from 17.7% for the 65% mixed-precision solution to 32.7% for the 35% configuration. Notably, the 45% mixed-precision network achieves a 27.6% energy reduction compared to the 8-bit baseline and an 88.4% reduction compared to the full-precision im-plementation. The reduced energy saving with respect to the case in which only the accelerated layers are considered underscores the necessity of a holistic approach to system-level optimization. Figure 5 illustrates the per-layer normalized energy breakdown for the 45% mixed-precision network, categorized by the preci-sion configurations selected for each of the twelve BERT blocks. The breakdown partitions energy consumption into main memory (DRAM), global buffer (GB), register files (Reg), and computational units (Comp). The results highlight that the energy budget is pri-marily consumed by the computational units and register files of compute-bound layers, such as QKV, MHSA, Att.o, FFN.i, and FFN.o. In contrast, the energy contribution from the remaining layers is negligible, characterized by a mix of compute-dominant behavior in GELU and memory-dominant behavior in LN1 and LN2 normal-ization layers. 

4.2.2 ResNet-50. Figure 6a illustrates the results of our methodol-ogy applied to ResNet-50. For energy budgets exceeding 55%, the accuracy loss remains within 4.5% of the full-precision baseline. The comprehensive EDP comparison is presented in Figure 6b. Compared to the 8-bit baseline, EDP reductions range from 35% for the 75% mixed-precision solution to 66% for the 45% configuration. The 55% mixed-precision solution achieves a 57% reduction in EDP relative to the 8-bit implementation and a 98% reduction compared to the full-precision model. Figure 6c shows the normalized comprehensive energy for vari-ous precision distributions, categorized into accelerated low-precision matrix multiplications (Quant) and BatchNorm (BN) kernels. En-ergy savings relative to the 8-bit baseline range from 21.5% at the 75% budget to 48% at the 45% budget. For the 55% mixed-precision 

Figure 7: Normalized comprehensive energy broken down for architectural components, for selected ResNet-50 layers. Results are normalized to the energy consumption of the initial Conv1 layer. Precision values are reported exclusively for the accelerated layers of the model. 

network, overall energy is reduced by 39.4% compared to the 8-bit baseline and by 93% compared to full precision. The per-layer energy breakdown for the 55% mixed-precision ResNet-50, including convolutional (L x.B y.C z, as Layer x, Block 

y, Convolution z) and subsequent Batch Normalization (BN x.y.z)layers, is detailed in Figure 7. These results reflect the interplay between input feature map size, weight tensor dimensions, the Eye-riss row-stationary dataflow reuse, and the assigned layer precision. The elevated energy consumption of the initial layer, Conv1 , stems from a high volume of 8-bit FMA operations and mapping ineffi-ciencies caused by the small input channel dimension. Conversely, the energy profile of BatchNorm layers directly correlates with the size of the input hidden vectors. 

4.2.3 Execution time. We measured the average execution time of SEADA’s components on an AMD Epyc 7302 @ 3 GHz, utilizing 8-thread parallel execution for the mapping phase. To optimize the creation of the mapping library, we performed the search for 

9PRE-PRINT 

Leandro Fiorin, Marco Ronzani, and Cristina Silvano 

Table 1: Average execution time of SEADA components. 

BERT-base ResNet-50 Generation mapping library 15 min 40s 19 min 8s Precision selection 1 min 42s 53s Number of epochs for checkpoints 60 40 Number fine-tuning epochs 60 40 

Figure 8: Results of the design space exploration. The Pareto frontier consists of configurations that jointly minimize the EDP and the CBR. 

optimal mappings only once for all layers sharing identical char-acteristics. Table 1 details these timing measurements, categorized into library generation, the mixed-precision selection process (en-compassing empirical entropy computation, Knapsack optimization, and checkpoint generation) and the total number of fine-tuning epochs required. Due to a greater variety of unique layer configura-tions, the overhead for generating the ResNet-50 mapping library is generally higher than for BERT. The cumulative time for library generation and network selection remains negligible compared to the overall training and fine-tuning duration. 

4.2.4 Cost of data conversion. We compared full-precision layers with and without fused quantization/de-quantization steps. Fusing these operations masks their overhead and reduces memory-related energy as full-precision layers write quantized operands back to memory instead of full-precision values. Estimates show a 2% en-ergy reduction for mixed-precision BERT-base (45% solution) versus 40% for ResNet-50 (55% solution). This disparity occurs because BERT’s energy is dominated by compute-intensive kernels where memory savings are negligible. Conversely, ResNet-50 features memory-bound BatchNorm layers with low arithmetic intensity, making it highly sensitive to memory access efficiency. 

5 Architectural design-space exploration 

SEADA’s high efficiency enables its application within a more com-prehensive architectural design-space exploration. As a case study, this section investigates the optimal configuration of the baseline accelerator’s memory hierarchy. In previous experiments, we explored various hardware budgets to derive that 45% mixed-precision configuration maximized en-ergy savings with minimal accuracy degradation. As architectural parameters vary, the relationship between mixed-precision distri-butions and accuracy degradation shifts for each configuration. Unlike high-level proxy metrics such as bit Multiply-Accumulate (bMAC) counts, the accuracy achieved for a given hardware budget is intrinsically linked to the mapping strategy, the optimization metric, and hardware-specific implementation details. In our architectural design exploration flow, rather than fine tun-ing every explored configuration to determine its specific accuracy, we adopted the Computational Bit Reduction (CBR) metric, defined as the percentage reduction in the total number of bMACs between a uniform 8-bit baseline and a given mixed-precision model. This serves as a hardware-independent proxy for post-fine-tuning accu-racy; intuitively, a higher CBR increases the likelihood of significant accuracy degradation. Assuming an EAGL-like approach can determine the optimal pre-cision distribution under a constrained hardware budget, it is critical to emphasize that the relationship between CBR and accuracy is an intrinsic property of the DNN model, governed by the entropy of its constituent layers. Once this relationship is characterized for a baseline architecture, the CBR metric serves as a hardware-agnostic proxy for accuracy across all explored architectural configurations. As the 45% mixed-precision configuration was identified as the operating point that achieves the highest energy savings while constraining the accuracy degradation to within 1%, we adopted the corresponding CBR as upper bound for the selection of candidate solutions during the design space exploration. In our exploration, we fixed the total hardware area and the number of PEs and we swept the sizes of the global buffer and all register files (input, weight, and output). The baseline storage area was determined by Equation 12. 

𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎 = #𝑃𝐸 × 𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎 (3 × 32 𝐵 𝑅𝐹𝑠 ) + 𝐴𝑟𝑒𝑎 (2𝑀𝐵 𝐺𝐵 ) (12) 

To better leverage the heterogeneous memory hierarchy, we allow the mapping tool to fully explore the mapping space, rather than constraining it to the row-stationary dataflow originally em-ployed in Eyeriss. We evaluate this approach on the BERT-base workload, using overall EDP minimization as the primary optimiza-tion objective. The register file size of each PE was varied in increments of 32B. For each configuration, the corresponding global buffer area was derived using Equation 12, with a granularity of 8KB. For every architectural instance, the overall EDP and CBR were evaluated under energy budgets ranging from 35% to 60% of the energy of the corresponding 8-bit configuration, in increments of 5%. Figure 8 reports the results of the design space exploration, high-lighting the Pareto-optimal points that jointly minimize the overall EDP and the CBR. The horizontal line denotes the CBR associ-ated with the 45% mixed-precision configuration identified in Sec-tion 4.2.1. To validate our hypothesis regarding accuracy degradation, the configurations highlighted in the figure were fine tuned, and their corresponding F1 scores were measured. As shown in Figure 8, the accuracy degrades rapidly for CBR values exceeding the reference threshold, thereby supporting the use of CBR as an efficient proxy metric for accuracy during the design space exploration. 

10 PRE-PRINT 

SEADA: An efficient methodology for optimizing mixed-precision DNNs on multi-precision spatial architectures 

The total exploration time required 6 hours and 49 minutes to complete. For larger design spaces, heuristics and pruning tech-niques can be easily integrated to significantly reduce exploration time. The selected Pareto-optimal configuration underlined in Fig-ure 8 utilizes a 1776 KB Global Buffer and 192-byte register files. It achieves a total EDP and energy reduction of 51% and 20%, re-spectively, compared to a uniform 8-bit model. When compared to a full-precision baseline, these savings increase to 97.7% for EDP and 90% for energy. 

6 Related Work 

The use of mixed-precision in DNNs, in which a different precision is used for different layers, has been recently proposed as a method to reduce computational costs. Several methodologies have been proposed to optimally select the precision distribution. Research has evolved toward treating mixed-precision assign-ment as a constrained optimization problem, typically aimed at balancing hardware efficiency with model sensitivity. HAWQ-V3[ 42 ] utilizes Integer Linear Programming (ILP) and a Hessian-based sensitivity metric[ 11 ] to optimize bit-precisions, no-tably using dyadic arithmetic to maintain an integer-only pipeline. Similarly, [ 6 ] employs a second-order Taylor expansion to quantify sensitivity, reformulating precision selection into a Multiple Choice Knapsack Problem to maximize accuracy within fixed resource budgets. Alternative strategies, such as ALPS [ 3 ], rank layer importance through empirical accuracy drops, while EAGL [ 3 ] introduces a faster analytical approach using weight distribution entropy as a proxy for sensitivity. By framing the selection as a 0-1 Knap-sack Problem, EAGL efficiently prioritizes higher bit-widths for high-entropy layers, ensuring optimal compression with minimal accuracy loss. Our work extends the EAGL methodology to support a broader range of precision choices while addressing the limitations of ab-stract cost models. Unlike previous approaches that rely on simpli-fied metrics, we incorporate a high-fidelity analytical model that reflects specific architectural details of spatial accelerators. This model accounts for optimized application mapping, the overhead of quantization and de-quantization, and the energy consumption of non-quantized kernels, providing a more accurate representation of system-level performance. Research related to our approach can be also found in the litera-ture focusing on the mapping of DNN algorithms onto spatial archi-tectures to minimize specific cost metrics. Tools such as MAESTRO [ 26 ] and Timeloop [ 30 ] utilize the dataflow concept to represent spatial accelerator mappings and assess the performance of CNN algorithms. These tools employ activity-based analytical models to evaluate the computational and memory costs associated with selected mapping design points. Additionally, exploration tools like GAMMA [ 22 ] facilitate the investigation of per-layer dataflows optimized for specific hardware accelerators, aiming to minimize latency, energy consumption, or EDP. Other tools, including LOMA [ 37 ], CoSA [ 18 ], and SALSA [ 20 ], focus on the optimal mapping and scheduling of DNNs onto spatial accelerators. They achieve this through various methods, including brute-force exploration, mixed-integer linear programming formulations, and simulated annealing to optimize loop structures and orders. FactorFlow [33] and QuickFlow [ 34 ] further refine the mapping design space for GEMMs and CNNs, respectively, by leveraging adaptive program-ming and greedy optimization techniques, achieving local optimal solutions with exploration times that are an order of magnitude faster than those of earlier tools. The above mentioned frameworks support the exploration of the DNN mapping space but assume a single, generic, and unspecified precision for computations. How framework leverages the explo-ration capabilities of QuickFlow incorporating an activity-based cost model for multi-precision architectures, allowing expanding the exploration of the mapping of mixed-precision DNNs on spatial architectures. The QUIDAM framework [ 19 ] enables a unified design-space exploration by simultaneously optimizing DNN models and hard-ware accelerators across various bit-precisions. A key finding of the study is that the interplay between bit-precision and PE cre-ates an expansive design space, where performance-per-area and energy efficiency can vary by orders of magnitude. By leveraging low-precision lightweight PEs, the researchers achieved signifi-cantly higher hardware efficiency than traditional INT16-based implementations without compromising model accuracy. Although QUIDAM models low-precision pipelines, its optimiza-tion focus is limited to single-precision processing, offering no support for mixed-precision implementation exploration. In [ 24 ], a joint optimization framework is introduced that couples mixed-precision quantization with hardware mapping. By enhanc-ing Timeloop to handle variable bit-widths, the authors demonstrate how reduced precision improves data tiling and bit-packing. The search space is navigated using the NSGA-II algorithm, balancing accuracy against energy and memory constraints. A notable con-straint of this work is that while it optimizes data movement and storage through mixed precision, the underlying MAC units remain at a fixed precision and are not part of the optimization process. The work in [ 27 ] pioneered the integration of mixed-precision into dataflow exploration for spatial architectures. In SEADA, we introduce a redesigned framework built upon Quickflow, signifi-cantly expanding the analytical reach of [ 27 ]. Key enhancements include the integration of dedicated cost models for quantization/de-quantization and un-quantized kernels, alongside a refined method-ology for per-layer precision selection and the rapid evaluation of inference accuracy. By co-optimizing these hardware and software variables, SEADA provides a more holistic view of the trade-offs in mixed-precision DNN deployment on spatial hardware. 

7 Conclusions 

This work presents SEADA, a fast methodology for the optimization of mixed-precision DNNs on multi-precision architectures. SEADA comprises: (i) a configurable system-level analytical cost model of a multi-precision spatial accelerator architecture; (ii) a fast mapping tool that identifies near-optimal mappings of DNN workloads onto the target integer accelerator; (iii) analytical models for floating-point layers to estimate the overall benefits of mixed-precision execution; and (iv) a per-layer precision selection methodology 

11 PRE-PRINT 

Leandro Fiorin, Marco Ronzani, and Cristina Silvano 

based on bit-level entropy, enabling efficient assignment across multiple numerical precisions. SEADA’s high efficiency enables its application within a more comprehensive architectural design-space exploration. We investi-gated the optimal configuration of a multi-precision accelerator’s memory hierarchy, demonstrating how a novel metric, Computa-tional Bit Reduction, serves as a reliable proxy for model accuracy. This approach allows for exploration without the need to fine tune the DNN model for every architectural configuration. Upon acceptance of this article, the complete source code will be released as open-source to support reproducibility and further research. 

References 

[1] Michael Andersch, Greg Palmer, Ronny Krashinsky, Nick Stam, Vishal Mehta, Gonzalo Brito, and Sridhar Ramaswamy. 2022. NVIDIA Hopper Architecture In-Depth . Technical Report. NVIDIA. https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/nvidia-hopper-architecture-in-depth/ [2] Renzo Andri, Enrico Reggiani, and Lukas Cavigelli. 2025. Flex-SFU: Activation Function Acceleration With Nonuniform Piecewise Approximation. IEEE Trans-actions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems 44, 11 (2025), 4236–4248. https://doi.org/10.1109/TCAD.2025.3558140 [3] Deepika Bablani, Jeffrey L. McKinstry, Steven K. Esser, Rathinakumar Ap-puswamy, and Dharmendra S. Modha. 2024. Efficient and Effective Methods for Mixed Precision Neural Network Quantization for Faster, Energy-efficient Inference. In ASPLOS’24 Workshop on Energy Efficient Machine Learning and Cognitive Computing (EMC2) . https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.13330 [4] Andrea Belano, Yvan Tortorella, Angelo Garofalo, Luca Benini, Davide Rossi, and Francesco Conti. 2025. A Flexible Template for Edge Generative AI With High-Accuracy Accelerated Softmax and GELU. IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems 15, 2 (2025), 200–216. https://doi.org/10. 1109/JETCAS.2025.3562734 [5] Sami Ben Ali, Silviu-Ioan Filip, and Olivier Sentieys. 2024. A Stochastic Rounding-Enabled Low-Precision Floating-Point MAC for DNN Training. In 

Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference & Exhibition (DATE), 2024 . 1–6. https://doi.org/10.23919/DATE58400.2024.10546735 [6] Weihan Chen, Peisong Wang, and Jian Cheng. 2021. Towards Mixed-Precision Quantization of Neural Networks via Constrained Optimization. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) . 5330–5339. https://doi.org/ 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00530 [7] Yu-Hsin Chen, Joel Emer, and Vivienne Sze. 2016. Eyeriss: A Spatial Architec-ture for Energy-Efficient Dataflow for Convolutional Neural Networks. In 2016 ACM/IEEE 43rd Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) .367–379. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCA.2016.40 [8] Tri Dao. 2024. FlashAttention-2: Faster Attention with Better Parallelism and Work Partitioning. In 12th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.08691 [9] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, Kai Li, and Li Fei-Fei. 2009. Im-ageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database. In 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition . 248–255. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR. 2009.5206848 [10] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. 2018. BERT: Pre-training of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding. 

CoRR abs/1810.04805 (2018). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1810.04805 [11] Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Daiyaan Arfeen, Amir Gholami, Michael W. Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. 2020. HAWQ-V2: Hessian Aware Trace-Weighted Quantization of Neural Networks. In 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (Vancouver, BC, Canada) (NIPS ’20) . Article 1555, 12 pages. https://doi.org/doi/abs/10.5555/3495724.3497279 [12] Steven K Esser, Jeffrey L McKinstry, Deepika Bablani, Rathinakumar Appuswamy, and Dharmendra S Modha. 2020. Learned Step Size Quantization. In International Conference on Learning Representations . https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1902. 08153 [13] Sameh Galal and Mark Horowitz. 2011. Energy-Efficient Floating-Point Unit Design. IEEE Trans. Comput. 60, 7 (2011), 913–922. https://doi.org/10.1109/TC. 2010.121 [14] Amir Gholami, Sehoon Kim, Zhen Dong, Zhewei Yao, Michael W. Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. 2021. A Survey of Quantization Methods for Efficient Neural Network Inference. CoRR abs/2103.13630 (2021). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv. 2103.13630 [15] Mark Harris. 2016. Mixed-Precision Programming with CUDA 8 . Technical Report. NVIDIA. https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/mixed-precision-programming-cuda-8/ [16] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. 2016. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) . 770–778. https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.90 [17] Geoffrey E. Hinton, Oriol Vinyals, and Jeffrey Dean. 2015. Distilling the Knowl-edge in a Neural Network. CoRR abs/1503.02531 (2015). https://doi.org/10.48550/ arXiv.1503.02531 [18] Qijing Huang, Minwoo Kang, Grace Dinh, Thomas Norell, Aravind Kalaiah, James Demmel, John Wawrzynek, and Yakun Sophia Shao. 2021. CoSA: Scheduling by Constrained Optimization for Spatial Accelerators. In 2021 ACM/IEEE 48th Annual International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) . 554–566. https: //doi.org/10.1109/ISCA52012.2021.00050 [19] Ahmet Inci, Siri Virupaksha, Aman Jain, Ting-Wu Chin, Venkata Thallam, Ruizhou Ding, and Diana Marculescu. 2023. QUIDAM: A Framework for Quantization-aware DNN Accelerator and Model Co-Exploration. ACM Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst. 22, 2, Article 33 (Jan. 2023), 21 pages. https://doi.org/10. 1145/3555807 [20] Victor J.B. Jung, Arne Symons, Linyan Mei, Marian Verhelst, and Luca Benini. 2023. SALSA: Simulated Annealing based Loop-Ordering Scheduler for DNN Accelerators. In 2023 IEEE 5th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence Circuits and Systems (AICAS) . 1–5. https://doi.org/10.1109/AICAS57966.2023. 10168625 [21] Dhiraj D. Kalamkar, Dheevatsa Mudigere, Naveen Mellempudi, Dipankar Das, Ku-nal Banerjee, Sasikanth Avancha, Dharma Teja Vooturi, Nataraj Jammalamadaka, Jianyu Huang, Hector Yuen, Jiyan Yang, Jongsoo Park, Alexander Heinecke, Evan-gelos Georganas, Sudarshan Srinivasan, Abhisek Kundu, Misha Smelyanskiy, Bharat Kaul, and Pradeep Dubey. 2019. A Study of BFLOAT16 for Deep Learning Training. CoRR abs/1905.12322 (2019). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1905.12322 [22] Sheng-Chun Kao and Tushar Krishna. 2020. GAMMA: Automating the HW Mapping of DNN Models on Accelerators via Genetic Algorithm. In IEEE/ACM International Conference On Computer Aided Design, ICCAD . 44:1–44:9. https: //doi.org/10.1145/3400302.3415639 [23] Sehoon Kim, Amir Gholami, Zhewei Yao, Michael W Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. 2021. I-BERT: Integer-only BERT quantization. In International Conference on Machine Learning . PMLR, 5506–5518. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2101.01321 [24] Jan Klhufek, Miroslav Safar, Vojtech Mrazek, Zdenek Vasicek, and Lukas Sekanina. 2024. Exploring Quantization and Mapping Synergy in Hardware-Aware Deep Neural Network Accelerators. In 2024 27th International Symposium on Design & Diagnostics of Electronic Circuits & Systems (DDECS) . 1–6. https://doi.org/10. 1109/DDECS60919.2024.10508920 [25] Andrey Kuzmin, Mart Van Baalen, Yuwei Ren, Markus Nagel, Jorn Peters, and Tijmen Blankevoort. 2022. FP8 quantization: the power of the exponent. In 36th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) . Article 1065, 12 pages. https://doi.org/10.52202/068431-1065 [26] Hyoukjun Kwon, Prasanth Chatarasi, Michael Pellauer, Angshuman Parashar, Vivek Sarkar, and Tushar Krishna. 2019. Understanding Reuse, Performance, and Hardware Cost of DNN Dataflow: A Data-Centric Approach. In 52nd Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) (Columbus, OH, USA). 754–768. https://doi.org/10.1145/3352460.3358252 [27] Fiorin Leandro, Luigi Altamura, and Cristina Silvano. 2025. qGAMMA: A Frame-work for Optimal DNN Mapping on Multi-Precision Accelerators. In Embedded Computer Systems: Architectures, Modeling, and Simulation (SAMOS) . Springer International Publishing. [28] Sae Kyu Lee, Ankur Agrawal, Joel Silberman, Matthew Ziegler, Mingu Kang, Swa-gath Venkataramani, Nianzheng Cao, Bruce Fleischer, Michael Guillorn, Matthew Cohen, Silvia M. Mueller, Jinwook Oh, Martin Lutz, Jinwook Jung, Siyu Koswatta, Ching Zhou, Vidhi Zalani, Monodeep Kar, James Bonanno, Robert Casatuta, Chia-Yu Chen, Jungwook Choi, Howard Haynie, Alyssa Herbert, Radhika Jain, Kyu-Hyoun Kim, Yulong Li, Zhibin Ren, Scot Rider, Marcel Schaal, Kerstin Schelm, Michael R. Scheuermann, Xiao Sun, Hung Tran, Naigang Wang, Wei Wang, Xin Zhang, Vinay Shah, Brian Curran, Vijayalakshmi Srinivasan, Pong-Fei Lu, Sunil Shukla, Kailash Gopalakrishnan, and Leland Chang. 2022. A 7-nm Four-Core Mixed-Precision AI Chip With 26.2-TFLOPS Hybrid-FP8 Training, 104.9-TOPS INT4 Inference, and Workload-Aware Throttling. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits 57, 1 (2022), 182–197. https://doi.org/10.1109/JSSC.2021.3120113 [29] Yujun Lin, Haotian Tang, Shang Yang, Zhekai Zhang, Guangxuan Xiao, Chuang Gan, and Song Han. 2025. QServe: W4A8KV4 Quantization and System Co-design for Efficient LLM serving. Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys) 7 (2025). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.04532 [30] Angshuman Parashar, Priyanka Raina, Yakun Sophia Shao, Yu-Hsin Chen, Victor A. Ying, Anurag Mukkara, Rangharajan Venkatesan, Brucek Khailany, Stephen W. Keckler, and Joel Emer. 2019. Timeloop: A Systematic Approach to DNN Accelerator Evaluation. In 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Perfor-mance Analysis of Systems and Software (ISPASS) . 304–315. https://doi.org/10. 1109/ISPASS.2019.00042 [31] William H. Press, Saul A. Teukolsky, William T. Vetterling, and Brian P. Flannery. 2007. Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scientific Computing (3rd ed.). Cambridge University Press. 12 PRE-PRINT 

SEADA: An efficient methodology for optimizing mixed-precision DNNs on multi-precision spatial architectures 

[32] Pranav Rajpurkar, Jian Zhang, Konstantin Lopyrev, and Percy Liang. 2016. SQuAD: 100,000+ Questions for Machine Comprehension of Text. CoRR 

abs/1606.05250 (2016). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1606.05250 [33] Marco Ronzani and Cristina Silvano. 2025. FactorFlow: Mapping GEMMs on Spatial Architectures through Adaptive Programming and Greedy Optimization. In 30th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASPDAC) . 706–712. https://doi.org/10.1145/3658617.3697670 [34] Marco Ronzani and Cristina Silvano. 2025. QuickFlow: An Efficient Local Search Method to Map Convolutions on Spatial Architectures. In 2025 IEEE/ACM International Conference On Computer Aided Design (ICCAD) . 1–9. https: //doi.org/10.1109/ICCAD66269.2025.11240877 [35] Cristina Silvano, Daniele Ielmini, Fabrizio Ferrandi, Leandro Fiorin, Serena Curzel, Luca Benini, Francesco Conti, Angelo Garofalo, Cristian Zambelli, En-rico Calore, Sebastiano Schifano, Maurizio Palesi, Giuseppe Ascia, Davide Patti, Nicola Petra, Davide De Caro, Luciano Lavagno, Teodoro Urso, Valeria Cardellini, Gian Carlo Cardarilli, Robert Birke, and Stefania Perri. 2025. A Survey on Deep Learning Hardware Accelerators for Heterogeneous HPC Platforms. Comput. Surveys 57, 11 (June 2025), 1–39. https://doi.org/10.1145/3729215 [36] Xiao Sun, Naigang Wang, Chia-yu Chen, Jia-min Ni, Ankur Agrawal, Xiaodong Cui, Swagath Venkataramani, Kaoutar El Maghraoui, Vijayalakshmi Srinivasan, and Kailash Gopalakrishnan. 2020. Ultra-low precision 4-bit training of deep neural networks. In 34th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS) . Article 152, 12 pages. [37] Arne Symons, Linyan Mei, and Marian Verhelst. 2021. LOMA: Fast Auto-Scheduling on DNN Accelerators through Loop-Order-based Memory Allocation. In 2021 IEEE 3rd International Conference on Artificial Intelligence Circuits and Systems (AICAS) . 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1109/AICAS51828.2021.9458493 [38] Run Wang, Gamze Islamoglu, Andrea Belano, Viviane Potocnik, Francesco Conti, Angelo Garofalo, and Luca Bonini. 2025. VEXP: A Low-Cost RISC-V ISA Extension for Accelerated Softmax Computation in Transformers. In 

2025 IEEE 32nd Symposium on Computer Arithmetic (ARITH) . 37–44. https: //doi.org/10.1109/ARITH64983.2025.00016 [39] B. P. Welford. 1962. Note on a method for calculating corrected sums of squares and products. Technometrics 4, 3 (1962), 419–420. [40] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement De-langue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. 2020. Transformers: State-of-the-Art Natural Language Processing. In 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-cessing (EMNLP) . 38–45. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2020.emnlp-demos.6 [41] Yannan Nellie Wu, Joel S. Emer, and Vivienne Sze. 2019. Accelergy: An Architecture-Level Energy Estimation Methodology for Accelerator Designs. In 

2019 IEEE/ACM International Conference on Computer-Aided Design (ICCAD) . 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCAD45719.2019.8942149 [42] Zhewei Yao, Zhen Dong, Zhangcheng Zheng, Amir Gholami, Jiali Yu, Eric Tan, Leyuan Wang, Qijing Huang, Yida Wang, Michael W. Mahoney, and Kurt Keutzer. 2020. HAWQ-V3: Dyadic Neural Network Quantization. CoRR abs/2011.10680 (2020). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2011.10680 [43] Jiaqi Zhang. 2025. Survey of Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) Applications in Deep Learning Quantization. In 2025 International Symposium on Artificial Intelligence and Computational Social Sciences (AICSS) . 431–442. https://doi.org/ 10.1145/3776759.3776826 [44] Xiaotian Zhao, Ruge Xu, and Xinfei Guo. 2023. Post-training Quantization or Quantization-aware Training? That is the Question. In 2023 China Semiconduc-tor Technology International Conference (CSTIC) . 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1109/ CSTIC58779.2023.10219214 [45] Shuchang Zhou, Zekun Ni, Xinyu Zhou, He Wen, Yuxin Wu, and Yuheng Zou. 2016. DoReFa-Net: Training Low Bitwidth Convolutional Neural Networks with Low Bitwidth Gradients. CoRR abs/1606.06160 (2016). https://doi.org/10.48550/ arXiv.1606.06160 13