JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
1
Adaptive Semantic Communication with Residual
Quantization for Resilient Vehicular Networks
Xuanhao Luo, Ruichen Gao, Sandeep Sreenivasan, Zhizhen Li, Yuchen Liu, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Vehicular networks require timely visual informa-
tion exchange to support safety-critical applications such as
cooperative perception and hazard awareness, yet transmitting
high-dimensional camera data over bandwidth-limited and dy-
namic wireless links remains challenging. In this paper, we
propose an adaptive semantic communication architecture for
vehicular multicast that adjusts the amount of visual information
transmitted according to current channel conditions, available
communication resources, and latency requirements. Specifically,
the visual encoder uses residual quantization to represent each
image at multiple bitrate and reconstruction-quality levels. At
runtime, the system selects an appropriate level based on the
communication conditions, enabling it to trade visual fidelity
for lower transmission overhead when network resources are
limited. Context-adaptive entropy coding further compresses the
quantized representations using offline-learned statistics, without
requiring retraining for different channel conditions. This design
allows the visual representation to be learned offline while the
communication strategy is adapted online. Experimental results
demonstrate competitive rate-distortion performance at ultra-
low bitrates, improved delivery reliability and deadline satisfac-
tion across diverse vehicular scenarios, and strong downstream
perception performance, achieving up to 0.88 mAP50 while
dynamically adapting to changing communication conditions.
Index
Terms—Vehicular
networks,
semantic
compression,
residual quantization, entropy coding, visual communication
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern visual communication systems, such as vehicular
perception [1], satellite imaging [2], and edge–cloud vision
platforms [3], require the efficient transmission of high-
dimensional visual data over bandwidth-limited and dynam-
ically varying wireless links. In these scenarios, camera or
LiDAR data must be delivered in real time despite rapid
fluctuations in channel conditions caused by mobility, inter-
ference, and environmental dynamics. Vehicular networks, in
particular, represent a highly demanding setting, where coop-
erative perception [4], collision avoidance [5], and emergency
response [6] rely on low-latency and reliable dissemination of
visual information [7]. However, road wireless environments
are inherently dynamic, with rapidly varying channel condi-
tions, heterogeneous receiver populations, and limited commu-
nication resources. These factors make it challenging to deliver
high-dimensional visual data efficiently. Conventionally, visual
communication pipelines rely on pixel-level codecs such as
X. Luo, S. Sandeep, Z. Li and Y. Liu are with the Department of Computer
Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 27695, USA (Emails:
{xluo26, srsreeni, zli92, yuchen.liu}@ncsu.edu).
R. Gao is with the Department of Electrical and Computer En-
gineering, New York University, Brooklyn, NY, 11201, USA (Email:
ruichen.gao@nyu.edu).
JPEG or HEVC to reduce transmission overhead. While ef-
fective in removing statistical redundancy, these methods are
agnostic to task semantics, allocating bits uniformly across the
scene regardless of their relevance to downstream perception
tasks.
This limitation motivates the development of semantic
communication (SemCom) techniques, which focus on pre-
serving task relevant information to achieve higher com-
pression efficiency [8]. Many recent works adopt deep joint
source–channel coding (JSCC) [9], which jointly optimizes
source representation and channel transmission under specific
physical layer settings. However, such designs inherently
couple source and channel coding, making their performance
dependent on the channel assumptions considered during
training. When channel conditions deviate from the training
regime, adaptation or retraining may be required [10], and
reconstruction quality can degrade as the channel quality
deteriorates [11]. This coupling is less suited to our target
setting of safety critical vehicular communication, where pre-
dictable reconstruction after successful delivery and flexible
runtime adaptation under rapidly varying channel and resource
conditions are particularly important. Meanwhile, some gen-
erative model based approaches [12], [13] reconstruct data
by sampling from learned data priors, which may produce
perceptually plausible but semantically inconsistent outputs.
Such behavior can undermine the reliability of reconstructed
content in safety critical vehicular perception tasks, for in-
stance, when nearby vehicles are missed, blurred, or spa-
tially distorted. More importantly, existing works primarily
focus on reconstruction or task performance under channel
impairments, while transmission latency, delivery reliability,
downstream perception utility, and runtime adaptation must
be jointly considered in dynamic vehicular networks.
Motivated by these challenges, we adopt a system-oriented
perspective and decouple semantic source coding from channel
modeling to improve communication flexibility and adapt-
ability. Here, flexibility refers to reuse pretrained semantic
representations across heterogeneous and evolving wireless en-
vironments without requiring redesign or retraining for specific
channel models. Adaptability, on the other hand, captures the
capability of the system to dynamically adjust transmission
strategies at runtime, such as rate allocation, redundancy
control, or semantic prioritization, in response to time-varying
channel conditions and task requirements, thereby maintain-
ing consistent end-task performance under uncertainty. Our
design therefore focuses on learning compact and structured
visual representations that enable predictable and controllable
trade-offs among semantic fidelity, transmission latency, and
arXiv:2610.10886v1  [cs.NI]  7 Oct 2026


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
2
delivery reliability.
To this end, we develop an adaptive SemCom architecture,
which integrates residual quantization (RQ) with n-gram-
based arithmetic coding (NAC). The RQ module exposes
multiple hierarchical discrete representations with different
quantization depths, allowing the residual quantization depth
to serve as a runtime communication control variable across
different bitrate-fidelity operating points. The NAC module
then losslessly compresses the discrete index sequence at each
operating point by exploiting short-range contextual dependen-
cies, further reducing the transmission payload without alter-
ing the underlying semantic representation. To address time-
varying wireless conditions, we then develop a lightweight
model adaptation mechanism that dynamically adjusts the
semantic compression depth to meet varying bandwidth and
latency constraints. It is worth noting that the proposed frame-
work is channel-agnostic at the representation learning stage,
while remaining channel-aware at runtime through lightweight
depth adaptation in the second stage. Beyond conventional
reconstruction metrics, we jointly consider perceptual task
accuracy, delivery success, and latency. This system-level
evaluation framework provides a comprehensive assessment of
whether transmitted visual information remains useful under
realistic communication and computing constraints. By com-
bining adaptive semantic compression with perception-aware
evaluation, RQ-NAC bridges the gap between communication
efficiency and semantic reliability in safety-critical vehicular
networks. The main contributions of this paper are summarized
as follows:
• We develop a system-level adaptive semantic communica-
tion architecture for vehicular multicast that exposes pre-
trained RQ configurations as runtime-selectable operating
points, enabling the communication system to adapt the
transmitted representation to dynamic channel, resource,
and latency conditions without online retraining.
• We propose a scalable compression framework, RQ-
NAC, that combines residual quantization with context-
adaptive lossless entropy coding. Different RQ depth con-
figurations provide controllable bitrate and reconstruction
fidelity trade-offs, while the offline entropy model further
reduces the corresponding residual index streams.
• We design a lightweight runtime depth-selection mech-
anism that jointly considers effective multicast capacity,
receiver scale, and application deadlines. The controller
dynamically selects the RQ operating point under a
unified policy, enabling adaptive trade-offs between re-
construction fidelity and timely delivery.
• We conduct a comprehensive system-level evaluation
across representative vehicular multicast scenarios, in-
cluding rate-distortion comparison with recent learning-
based compression baselines, runtime profiling, con-
trolled channel and resource sensitivity, downstream per-
ception, and out-of-distribution robustness.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Sec-
tion II reviews related work. Section III introduces the vehicu-
lar communication model and operating scenarios. Section IV
presents the proposed RQ-NAC framework, and Section V
describes the runtime adaptive depth-selection mechanism.
Section VI presents the evaluation methodology, while Sec-
tion VII reports the experimental results on compression,
system-level adaptation, downstream perception, and robust-
ness under distribution shift. Section VIII concludes the paper.
II. RELATED WORK
Network planning and communication under limited re-
sources remain fundamental challenges in dynamic wireless
systems [14]–[16]. Semantic communication has emerged as
a promising paradigm to address the limitations of traditional
bit-level communication, particularly in resource-constrained
and dynamic environments such as vehicular networks [17]–
[19]. The core idea is to transmit only the task-relevant
information, thereby improving communication efficiency and
robustness [20], [21]. In general, SemCom systems can be
broadly categorized into task-oriented and reconstruction-
oriented paradigms based on their transmission objectives.
Task-oriented SemCom focuses on transmitting task-relevant
features for downstream applications, such as image classifica-
tion, machine translation, and visual question answering [22].
In contrast, reconstruction-oriented SemCom aims to recon-
struct semantically faithful contents or signals at the receiver
[23]. In a broader sense, reconstruction can also be regarded
as a specific type of task [24] in communication systems.
Within these SemCom paradigms, JSCC has been widely
studied as a representative approach for end-to-end transmis-
sion [9], [11], [25], [26]. Classical JSCC schemes are typi-
cally tailored to specific source–channel pairs, limiting their
generalizability across different communication environments
[25]. Recent deep learning-based JSCC approaches leverage
neural networks to learn end-to-end mappings, demonstrating
improved robustness under noisy conditions [9], [11]. HARQ-
assisted SemCom has also been explored for LiDAR coop-
erative perception under noisy wireless channels [27]. These
approaches primarily focus on preserving semantic or task
information under channel impairments. In contrast, our work
targets scalable ultra low bitrate visual source coding for band-
width constrained vehicular communication, while decoupling
representation learning from the channel model and adapting
the RQ depth at runtime according to communication and
latency constraints. This distinction is particularly relevant
to safety critical vehicular applications, where reliability and
timely delivery are essential system requirements [28]. In such
settings, the decoupled design avoids direct channel induced
degradation of the reconstructed representation after successful
delivery.
To reduce reliance on end-to-end training and improve
adaptability in dynamic wireless environments, recent works
explore generative model-based SemCom. For example, [10],
[12] leverage generative adversarial networks (GAN) inversion
with pretrained generative models to enable training-free se-
mantic transmission. [13] proposes a training-free generative
SemCom system using diffusion models, where semantic
features are transmitted and images are reconstructed at the
receiver via noise-aware diffusion sampling. While such ap-
proaches improve perceptual quality and flexibility, generative


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
3
Source image
Transmitter (Source Vehicle)
    Dashcam
Roadside camera
Adaptive Depth
Controller
......
V2V Multicast
Channel
Semantic Encoder
n-gram Arithmetic
Coding
Residual Quantizer
Compressed Semantic Bitstream
...
Downstream
Perception
Selected Depth
Channel State
(SINR, Interference, ...)
Receiver 1
Reconstructed
Image
Semantic Decoder
Receiver n
Reconstructed
Image
Semantic Decoder
Fig. 1. System overview of the proposed adaptive SemCom framework for V2V multicast in wireless networks. A source vehicle encodes visual data from
its camera or sensor into a compact semantic representation, which is then transmitted to multiple receivers over a shared wireless channel. The compression
configuration is dynamically adjusted based on channel conditions and system constraints.
models such as GANs, variational autoencoder (VAEs), and
diffusion models reconstruct data by sampling from learned
data priors [29]–[31], which may produce perceptually plausi-
ble but semantically inconsistent outputs, i.e., hallucinations.
This prior-driven generation leads to semantic drift from the
original input, which is undesirable in safety-critical applica-
tions such as vehicular perception, where reliable and accurate
perception is essential [32]. This limitation motivates the
exploration of more reliable semantic representation schemes.
To address the above limitations of generative model-based
approaches, recent works have explored alternative designs
based on discrete latent representations that decouple source
and channel coding. In [33], a framework based on vector-
quantized VAE (VQ-VAE) is adopted to encode images into
discrete latent codes, improving reliability and compatibility
with digital communication systems. Unlike generative ap-
proaches, discrete representation-based methods perform de-
terministic encoding and reconstruction, preserving structural
consistency with the original input while introducing only
controlled distortion. From a probabilistic perspective, VQ-
VAE can still be interpreted within the VAE framework, where
the posterior becomes deterministic and the Kullback–Leibler
(KL) divergence term reduces to a constant under a uniform
prior [34]. Recent efforts further improve VQ-based com-
pression by enhancing the quantization process. For instance,
Adaptive VQ-VAE [35] introduces a hyper-network to gen-
erate adaptive side information, which reduces quantization
distortion and improves rate-distortion performance. However,
such approaches still rely on single-stage vector quantization,
limiting their representational capacity and scalability, espe-
cially under highly constrained bitrate regimes.
Residual-quantized VAE (RQ-VAE) [36] further extends
VQ-VAE via hierarchical residual quantization, enabling
multi-stage refinement of latent representations with control-
lable fidelity and bitrate. This hierarchical structure provides
greater flexibility and expressiveness compared to conven-
tional VQ-based methods, making it particularly suitable for
scalable semantic compression under dynamic wireless con-
ditions. In our preliminary work [37], we introduced RQ-
NAC as a channel-agnostic semantic compression framework
that combines residual quantization with n-gram-based arith-
metic coding for bandwidth-limited visual communication.
This paper substantially extends that framework by introducing
runtime depth adaptation under multicast channel and latency
constraints, block-level HARQ modeling, system-level relia-
bility and latency evaluation, controlled channel and resource
sensitivity studies, and downstream perception analysis. These
extensions move the focus from standalone semantic compres-
sion to an adaptive SemCom system for dynamic vehicular
networks.
III. SYSTEM MODEL
Fig. 1 illustrates the overall vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) se-
mantic communication framework. At the source vehicle,
visual data are encoded into a compact semantic bitstream
and transmitted to multiple receivers over a shared wireless
channel. Each receiver decodes the received bitstream to
reconstruct the visual content for downstream perception. An
adaptive depth controller at the transmitter selects the RQ
operating point according to the observed channel state and
system constraints, enabling trade-offs among compression
efficiency, transmission latency, and reconstruction quality.
A. Communication Model
Let V = {v1, v2, . . . , vN} denote the set of receivers within
a local communication region, and let {γu}N
u=1 denote their in-
stantaneous signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) val-
ues. To model reliable multicast under heterogeneous receiver
conditions, we adopt a coverage-based bottleneck abstraction
and define the effective SINR as the (1 −η)-quantile of the
receiver SINR distribution:
γη = Quantile1−η({γu}),
(1)


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
4
where η denotes the target receiver coverage ratio. The effec-
tive SINR is then mapped to the multicast rate Rmc through
the PHY abstraction described in Section VI-D.
With K concurrent multicast flows and a resource fraction
ρ ∈(0, 1] allocated to visual semantic dissemination, the
effective resource fraction available to each flow is αeff =
ρ
K . Assuming an orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing
(OFDM)-based physical layer with N full
sc
available subcarriers
per scheduling interval, the effective number of subcarriers
assigned to each multicast flow is
Nsc = αeffN full
sc ,
(2)
which determines the achievable multicast throughput under
the PHY abstraction. Accordingly, the effective multicast rate
Rmc is jointly determined by the effective SINR γη and the
allocated resource fraction αeff.
B. Block Transmission and HARQ Model
To accurately capture the end-to-end latency and reliability
of semantic information delivery, we model the transmission
process using a block-based abstraction inspired by transport-
block-level HARQ in 5G NR systems [38]. The compressed
bitstream of size S bits is segmented into fixed-size trans-
mission blocks of Sblk bits, each corresponding to a PHY-
layer transport block that can be independently decoded and
retransmitted.
Under the PHY abstraction, the number of successfully
decoded bits per scheduling interval is denoted by bslot, which
is determined by the effective SINR γη and resource allocation
αeff. The transmission time of a single block is given by
Tblk =
Sblk
bslot

Tslot.
(3)
We adopt a simplified HARQ model in which each trans-
mission block can be retransmitted up to Nretx times upon
decoding failure. Let ni denote the number of transmission
attempts for the i-th block. The total transmission latency is
then expressed as
Ttx =
M
X
i=1
ni Tblk,
(4)
where M = ⌈S/Sblk⌉is the total number of blocks. The
resulting transmission latency is incorporated into the end-to-
end latency model used for runtime depth selection in Section
V.
C. Representative Operating Scenarios
To capture heterogeneous traffic and communication re-
quirements in vehicular networks, we consider three repre-
sentative operating scenarios: Cruise, Junction, and Collision.
These scenarios differ in multicast scale, channel conditions,
communication load, and latency requirements, providing a
range of operating conditions from relatively relaxed to highly
constrained transmission. The detailed parameter settings are
given in Section VI-D.
IV. PROPOSED TWO-STAGE SEMANTIC COMPRESSION
FRAMEWORK
The core component of the proposed semantic commu-
nication system is the semantic encoder shown in Fig. 1.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, the proposed solution, called RQ-
NAC, consists of a residual-quantization-based semantic en-
coder followed by a lossless context-adaptive entropy coding
module, forming a two-stage pipeline for scalable semantic
compression and efficient transmission.
A. Residual Quantization for Semantic Compression
In the first stage, a semantic encoder transforms the input
visual data into hierarchical discrete latent representations with
controllable quantization depth. Formally, let E(·) and G(·)
denote the encoder and decoder, respectively. Given an input
image X ∈RH×W ×3, the encoder produces a latent feature
map:
Z = E(X) ∈RHz×Wz×nz,
(5)
where Hz and Wz are the spatial dimensions of the latent
space, and nz is the feature dimensionality per spatial location.
Each spatial feature vector Zh,w ∈Rnz is quantized using
residual quantization with depth D and a shared codebook
C = {e(1), e(2), . . . , e(K)},
(6)
where e(k) ∈Rnz denotes the k-th codeword, and K is the
codebook size.
At the stage d, the quantizer selects a codeword e(k(d)
h,w)
from the codebook and refines the quantized approximation:
ˆZ(d)
h,w =
d
X
i=1
e(k(i)
h,w),
ˆZh,w = ˆZ(D)
h,w,
(7)
where d ∈{1, . . . , D} denotes the residual quantization depth.
The selected codeword indices are
Mh,w =
 k(1)
h,w, . . . , k(D)
h,w

,
which constitutes the discrete symbols generated during quan-
tization. Collectively, these index sequences form the code
map M
∈
[K]Hz×Wz×D, which serves as the compact
discrete representation transmitted over the wireless channel.
At the receiver side, the transmitted code map M is used to
reconstruct the quantized latent map ˆZ ∈RHz×Wz×nz, which
is subsequently decoded to obtain the final image ˆX = G( ˆZ).
The overall training objective combines a reconstruction
term and a multi-level commitment term as:
L = ∥X −ˆX∥2
2 + β
D
X
d=1
∥Z −sg[ ˆZ(d)]∥2
2,
(8)
where sg[·] denotes the stop-gradient operator, which acts as
the identity function during the forward pass while blocking
gradient propagation during backpropagation [34]. Following
the RQ-VAE implementation, we update the codebook using
exponential moving average (EMA) of the clustered encoder
outputs instead of gradient-based updates. This approach sta-
bilizes training and prevents codebook collapse. Additionally,
perceptual loss and patch-level adversarial loss are incorpo-
rated to enhance visual fidelity. This hierarchical quantization


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
5
n-gram
Arithmetic
coding (AC)
Stage 1: Semantic Encoder
Stage 2: Lossless
Entropy Compression
Decoder at Receiver
Original image
Reconstructed image
…
Residual
Quantizer
Flattened Code
Wireless
Channel
Shared
code book
Shared
frequency table
Bitstream
Code Map M
Downsample
Semantic
Decoder
Lossless AC
Decoder
Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed RQ-NAC pipeline, consisting of a residual-quantized semantic encoder and a context-adaptive entropy coding module.
structure refines the latent representation level by level while
sharing the same compact codebook across all depths, produc-
ing a discrete index tensor M. We then flatten the index tensor
M into a one-dimensional sequence s = (s1, s2, . . . , sN) with
length N = HzWzD. This sequence serves as the input to the
entropy coding stage as follows.
B. Context-adaptive Arithmetic Coding
After the semantic compression stage, the residual quantiza-
tion encoder outputs a sequence of discrete indices s. Although
already compact, this sequence still contains statistical redun-
dancy due to the strong correlation among neighboring indices.
To further exploit these dependencies, we adopt a context-
adaptive lossless entropy coding scheme.
From an information-theoretic view, the minimum achiev-
able code length of this sequence is its conditional entropy:
H(S | C) = −
X
st,ct
p(st, ct) log p(st | ct),
(9)
where p(st, ct) is the joint distribution of the symbol and
its context. In practice, arithmetic coding uses an estimated
model q(·), leading to an expected coding rate given by the
cross-entropy H(p, q) = Ep(st,ct)

−log q(st | ct)

. Thus,
improving the accuracy of q directly tightens the gap between
the achievable rate and the entropy bound.
To better approximate p(·) and capture local dependencies,
we employ an n-gram–based probabilistic model. Although
predictive autoregressive models such as LLMs or transformer-
based entropy models are used in natural language [39] and
byte-level [40], [41] compression, their sequential inference is
too slow for real-time visual data transmission. Thus, the n-
gram model provides a low computational overhead while still
capturing essential dependencies for entropy coding. Given a
context ct = (st−n+1, . . . , st−1), the conditional probability
of the next symbol is estimated by maximum likelihood:
ˆP(st | ct) = N(ct, st)
N(ct) ,
(10)
where N(ct, st) denotes the number of occurrences of the
(ct, st) pattern in the training corpus, and N(ct) is the number
of occurrences of the context ct. By conditioning on ct, the
n-gram estimator provides a more faithful approximation of
the true sequence statistics, thereby reducing the cross-entropy
term H(p, q) and improving lossless compression efficiency.
However, when certain n-gram combinations are unseen
during training, direct estimation may yield zero probabilities,
which can collapse the arithmetic coding (AC) interval. To
mitigate this issue, we apply additive smoothing [42] that
assigns a small nonzero probability to unseen symbols. The
smoothed conditional probability is defined as:
˜P(st | ct) = N(ct, st) + α
N(ct) + αK ,
(11)
where α is a small positive smoothing coefficient (0 < α ≤1)
and K is the codebook size. This approach ensures that every
possible symbol maintains a nonzero probability, thereby pre-
venting numerical instability and guaranteeing robust encoding
and decoding across all contexts. In our framework, the n-
gram estimator ˜P(st | ct) serves as the conditional probability
model q(st | ct) used by AC. The n-gram frequency table is
constructed offline and shared between encoder and decoder,
so no additional side information needs to be transmitted.
After obtaining the probability distribution from the n-gram
model, AC progressively narrows an interval [l, h) to encode
the entire sequence. At step t, the interval is updated according
to the cumulative distribution function F(· | ct) of ˜P(· | ct):
lt = lt−1 + (ht−1 −lt−1) · F(st | ct),
ht = lt−1 + (ht−1 −lt−1) · F(st + 1 | ct).
(12)
where:
F(k | ct) =
X
j<k
˜P(j | ct).
(13)
Through this iterative refinement, the interval [l, h) becomes
increasingly narrow as more symbols are encoded. After
processing all N indices, the final interval [lN, hN) uniquely


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
6
Fig. 3. Visual comparison of reconstructed images under different RQ depths.
Increasing the depth preserves richer local details and sharper object contours,
especially for nearby vehicles on the road.
represents the entire sequence, and any real number within
this range can serve as the compact binary representation
transmitted to the receiver.
At the receiver side, the decoder first loads the shared n-
gram frequency table, which contains the conditional prob-
ability model used during encoding. Using this model, the
arithmetic decoder reconstructs the latent index sequence in
a sequential manner: starting from the initial interval [0, 1),
it repeatedly finds the sub-interval whose probability range
contains the encoded value and updates the interval accord-
ingly. This process continues until all indices are recovered,
producing the exact same discrete code map as the encoder.
The recovered indices are then mapped to codewords using the
shared codebook to obtain the quantized latent representation
ˆZ, which is finally fed into the semantic decoder to generate
the reconstructed data.
V. ADAPTIVE MODEL SELECTION UNDER CHANNEL
CONSTRAINTS
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the adaptive depth controller deter-
mines the semantic encoding depth according to the observed
channel state and system constraints before transmission. This
section formalizes this runtime decision process as a channel-
aware model selection problem over a discrete set of residual
quantization depths.
A. Scaling Dimensions and Trade-offs
To enable adaptive communication under varying channel
bandwidth and latency constraints, the proposed framework
exploits two controllable scaling dimensions: the residual
quantization depth and the order of the entropy model.
The residual quantization depth serves as the primary run-
time adaptation variable. The hierarchical residual quantiza-
tion structure naturally provides multiple encoding depths,
where each additional level progressively refines the residual
error from the previous stage. Therefore, deeper quantization
preserves finer semantic details and improves reconstruction
quality, but produces a larger latent representation and incurs
higher transmission and decoding cost. In contrast, shallower
quantization provides a more compact representation with
TABLE I
PROFILING OF DIFFERENT n-GRAM ORDERS FOR RQ-NAC(8) WITH A
FIXED RQ DEPTH OF 8.
n
Enc. (ms)
Dec. (ms)
Peak Mem.
Storage
1
47.2
718.5
325.3 MiB
46.6 kB
2
77.9
770.9
1.3 GiB
59.0 MB
3
4400.8
819.2
210.7 GiB
22.8 GB
lower latency, at the expense of reduced semantic fidelity.
As illustrated in Fig. 3, increasing the residual quantization
depth leads to clearer reconstructions with richer scene details,
sharper vehicle boundaries, and more faithful local structures.
On the other hand, the n-gram-based entropy model intro-
duces another trade-off among compression efficiency, compu-
tational complexity, and statistical reliability. While increasing
n can capture higher-order dependencies among latent indices,
the context space grows exponentially, causing data sparsity
and rapidly increasing storage and lookup overhead. As shown
in our preliminary study of Table I, for RQ-NAC(8), moving
from 1-gram to 2-gram only moderately increases encoding
latency from 47.2 ms to 77.9 ms, whereas the 3-gram model
becomes impractical, requiring 4.4 s encoding latency, 210.7
GiB peak memory, and 22.8 GB storage. Therefore, we treat
the entropy model order as an offline tunable parameter and
adopt a moderate-order model for real-time deployment. The
impact of different n-gram orders on compression efficiency
is further analyzed in Sec. VII-A2.
Based on this trade-off analysis, we use the residual quan-
tization depth as a runtime adaptation variable for system
configuration, while treating the entropy model order as an
offline tunable parameter. This design allows the system to
adjust semantic bitrate and reconstruction fidelity according to
channel and latency conditions without retraining the semantic
codec.
B. Channel-Aware Adaptive Model Selection
Given the candidate RQ depth set D, we formulate runtime
model selection as a discrete optimization problem. At each
transmission instance, the encoder observes the effective mul-
ticast rate Rmc and the latency budget Tmax, and selects the
semantic configuration that maximizes utility while satisfying
the latency constraint.
Let d ∈D denote a candidate configuration. The adaptive
selection problem is formulated as
max
d∈D
U(d) = wq eQ(d) −(1 −wq) eT(d)
s.t.
T(d) ≤Tmax,
T(d) = Tenc(d) + E[Ttx(d)] + Tdec(d),
Q(d) = fQ(d),
d ∈D.
(14)
where Q(d) is the offline-profiled semantic reconstruc-
tion quality associated with configuration d, and T(d) ≜
E[Te2e(d)] denotes the expected end-to-end latency under cur-
rent channel conditions. The semantic quality Q(d), encoding
latency Tenc(d), and decoding latency Tdec(d) are profiled


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
7
offline for each candidate depth and stored for runtime lookup.
Thus, no online quality estimation or ground-truth reference is
required during deployment. The profiled Q(d) represents an
average quality operating point obtained from representative
vehicular data rather than an image specific estimate. The
normalized terms eQ(d) and eT(d) are obtained from Q(d)
and T(d), respectively, so that semantic quality and latency
cost can be compared on a consistent scale. The function
fQ(·) represents the offline-profiled mapping from quantiza-
tion depth to semantic reconstruction quality. The expected
transmission latency E[Ttx(d)] is derived from the block-level
HARQ model described in Section III, and depends on the
compressed bitstream size, the effective multicast rate, and the
retransmission process. The scalar weight wq ∈[0, 1] controls
the trade-off between semantic fidelity and latency, while the
latency weight is given by 1−wq. The same weight is applied
across all scenarios.
Based on this formulation, the selection procedure first
identifies the feasible candidate set. A candidate depth is
considered feasible if its expected end-to-end latency satisfies
the deadline constraint:
F = {d ∈D | T(d) ≤Tmax} .
(15)
If no candidate satisfies the above condition, the system falls
back to the depth with the minimum expected end-to-end
latency:
d⋆= arg min
d∈D T(d),
(16)
which provides graceful degradation under highly constrained
channel conditions.
When the feasible set is nonempty, the selected depth is
obtained by maximizing the utility over F:
d⋆= arg max
d∈F

wq eQ(d) −(1 −wq) eT(d)

.
(17)
After the RQ depth is selected, transmission is performed
under the stochastic block-level HARQ process, and the real-
ized latency and delivery success are obtained. Algorithm 1
summarizes the proposed runtime depth selection procedure.
Since the candidate set D is small, the computational com-
plexity is O(|D|), making the approach suitable for real-time
deployment without retraining or iterative optimization.
C. Safety-Critical Perception with Domain Adaptation
While the runtime adaptation relies on a lightweight per-
ceptual quality proxy Q(d) for efficient RQ depth selection,
vehicular communication must ultimately be evaluated by its
ability to preserve safety-critical semantic information under
dynamic wireless conditions. In particular, the perception of
nearby vehicles is of primary importance in autonomous driv-
ing scenarios, as close-range objects are directly related to col-
lision avoidance and immediate decision-making. Therefore,
beyond reconstruction fidelity, it is essential to assess whether
the transmitted semantic representations remain effective for
downstream perception tasks such as object detection.
A key challenge is the domain gap between generic natural-
image data and vehicular driving scenes, as well as the
discrepancy between original and reconstructed images. A
Algorithm 1 Runtime Adaptive Depth Selection for RQ-NAC
Require: Candidate depth set D; multicast rate Rmc; latency
budget Tmax
Ensure: Selected depth d⋆
1: F ←∅
2: for all d ∈D do
3:
retrieve semantic quality Q(d)
4:
estimate expected end-to-end latency
E[Te2e(d)] = Tenc(d) + E[Ttx(d)] + Tdec(d)
5:
if E[Te2e(d)] ≤Tmax then
6:
F ←F ∪{d}
7:
end if
8: end for
9: if F = ∅then
10:
d⋆←arg min
d∈D E[Te2e(d)]
11:
return d⋆
12: end if
13: compute normalized quality score eQ(d) and normalized
latency cost eT(d) for all d ∈F
14: d⋆←arg max
d∈F

wq eQ(d) −(1 −wq) eT(d)

15: return d⋆
detector trained on standard datasets may not generalize well
to semantic reconstructions that exhibit quantization artifacts
and texture smoothing. To address this issue, we adopt a
domain-adaptive fine-tuning strategy based on a YOLOv8n
detector as an example. Specifically, the detector is fine-tuned
on a vehicle-centric dataset to better capture the structural
characteristics of real-world driving scenes. The model is ini-
tialized from COCO-pretrained weights and optimized using
the standard YOLOv8 detection loss [43]:
Ldet = λboxLbox + λclsLcls + λdflLdfl,
(18)
where Lbox is based on Complete IoU (CIoU) [44], Lcls is
implemented using binary cross-entropy with logits, and Ldfl
denotes the Distribution Focal Loss [45] used for bounding-
box regression.
Importantly, we do not fine-tune the detector on compressed
images. Our approach is motivated by the observation that
RQ progressively refines the latent representation and tends to
preserve object-level layouts and contours, while fine-grained
textures may be smoothed under low-depth compression. This
observation is also visually illustrated in Fig. 3 and empir-
ically evaluated in Sec. VII-A. By fine-tuning the detector
on vehicle-centric original images, we encourage it to better
capture driving-scene structures and improve its generalization
to reconstructed images across different compression levels,
without requiring compression-specific retraining.
VI. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
A. Datasets and Baselines
We evaluate RQ-NAC in a bandwidth-limited vehicular
communication setting using the 100K Real-World Vehicle
Dashcam Image Dataset [46]. We use a training pool of


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
8
TABLE II
PHY-LAYER PARAMETERS.
Scheduling interval Tslot
1 ms
OFDM symbols per slot
14
Full subcarriers Nfull
sc
1024
Streams per user
1
Target BLER
0.10
Transmission block size
48 Kbits (6 KB)
Maximum retransmissions
4
MCS table index
1
20,000 images and 1,000 images for testing. Unless otherwise
specified, the RQ-NAC and VQ-VAE models are trained using
a 5,000-image subset. We additionally train RQ-NAC(4) using
the full 20,000 training set to study the effect of training
scale. To evaluate generalization under distribution shift, we
additionally conduct a case study using 1,000 frames from the
Car Crash Dataset [47], which is not used during training.
We compare RQ-NAC with different residual quantization
depths against VQ-VAE, the recent learning-based compres-
sion methods DiffEIC [48] and QRes-VAE [49], and the
traditional non-learned codecs HEVC and JPEG. Input images,
originally sized 1, 280×720, are zero-padded along the height
to 1, 280×736 so that the spatial dimensions are compatible
with the encoder downsampling operations. The original image
dimensions are used for BPP calculation.
B. Implementation Details
The semantic encoder and decoder follow the RQ-VAE ar-
chitecture as in [36]. The encoder progressively downsamples
the RGB input using convolutional and residual blocks and
maps it to a 256-dimensional latent representation. The resid-
ual quantization module uses a codebook with 2,048 entries
and an embedding dimension of 256. Different RQ depths
correspond to different numbers of residual refinement stages,
providing multiple bitrate and reconstruction fidelity operating
points through the hierarchical residual quantization structure.
The decoder mirrors the encoder structure and progressively
upsamples the quantized latent representation to reconstruct
the RGB image.
Unless otherwise specified, the NAC module uses a 2-gram
context model with smoothing coefficient α = 0.1. All RQ-
NAC models are trained using eight NVIDIA A100 GPUs on
the NVIDIA Saturn Cloud platform. The n-gram scalability
profiling in Table I is conducted on a high-memory Google
Cloud instance equipped with an Intel Xeon (Skylake) CPU
at approximately 2 GHz and 624 GB RAM, since the 3-gram
configuration requires substantially larger memory capacity.
Runtime profiling is conducted on a local computing platform
equipped with an Intel Core Ultra 9 275HX CPU and an
NVIDIA RTX 5080 Laptop GPU with 16 GB memory.
C. Evaluation Metrics
Reconstruction metrics. To evaluate the perceptual quality
of reconstructed image data, we adopt four data reconstruction
metrics in different dimensions. The Structural Similarity
Index Measure (SSIM) measures the structural and luminance
TABLE III
SCENARIO PARAMETERS FOR MULTICAST EVALUATION
Scenario
Tmax
N
µγ
σγ
ρ
K
(ms)
(min–max)
(dB)
(dB)
(min–max)
Cruise
1000
1–5
15
4
0.3
1–3
Junction
750
10–20
10
5
0.5
1–6
Collision
500
50–200
8
6
1.0
1–20
similarity between the reconstructed and ground-truth images.
The Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) quantifies pixel-level
reconstruction accuracy based on mean squared error (MSE).
The Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) eval-
uates perceptual similarity using deep feature representations.
Finally, the Fr´echet Inception Distance (FID) [50] measures
the distributional distance between reconstructed and reference
images in the feature space. It is defined as
FID = ∥µr −µg∥2
2 + Tr

Σr + Σg −2(ΣrΣg)1/2
,
(19)
where µr and Σr denote the mean and covariance of the
feature representations of the reference images, while µg and
Σg denote those of the reconstructed images.
Compression metrics. To evaluate the compression effi-
ciency and data compactness, we employ bits per pixel (BPP)
and compression ratio (CR). The BPP represents the average
number of bits required to encode each pixel in the compressed
image, i.e., BPP =
bcomp
H×W , where bcomp denotes the total
number of bits in the compressed bitstream, and H and W
denote the original image height and width, respectively. The
CR is defined as the ratio between the uncompressed and
compressed data sizes, i.e., CR =
Sorig
Scomp , where Sorig and
Scomp denote the sizes of the original and compressed data,
respectively. We also report the native BPP and compression
ratio of the JPEG source images provided by the dataset.
Since these files are used as the reference inputs rather than
reconstructed outputs, reconstruction metrics are not reported
for the JPEG baseline.
Communication metrics. We evaluate system-level perfor-
mance using success ratio, deadline-meet ratio, and end-to-end
latency. The success ratio is defined as Psucc = Nsucc/Ntot,
where Nsucc and Ntot denote the number of successful and
total transmissions, respectively. The deadline-meet ratio is de-
fined as Pddl = Nddl/Ntot, where Nddl counts transmissions
completed within the latency constraint Tmax. The end-to-end
latency comprises the delays incurred by source encoding,
wireless transmission, and destination decoding.
Perception metrics. We evaluate object detection perfor-
mance using precision, recall, and mean average precision
(mAP). To further characterize the relative importance of
detected objects in vehicular scenes, we also use a weighted
detection score (WDS), defined as
WDS =
P
i widi
P
i wi
,
(20)
where di ∈{0, 1} indicates whether the i-th ground-truth
object is correctly detected, and wi denotes its importance
weight. In this work, wi is defined as the normalized bounding-
box area, i.e., wi = widthi×heighti
H×W
, which serves as an impor-


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
9
TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON UNDER DIFFERENT COMPRESSION CONFIGURATIONS. “±” INDICATES THE STANDARD DEVIATION COMPUTED OVER THE
TEST SET. BOLD AND UNDERLINED VALUES INDICATE THE BEST AND SECOND-BEST RESULTS AMONG LEARNED MODELS, RESPECTIVELY. JPEG* IS A
NON-LEARNED CODEC INCLUDED AS A REFERENCE BASELINE.
Configuration
SSIM↑
PSNR (dB)↑
LPIPS↓
FID↓
BPP↓
CR↑(w/o AC)
CR↑(w/ AC)
VQ-VAE-5k
0.7047 ± 0.1028
22.42 ± 2.89
0.2667 ± 0.0758
39.1660
0.01098
2,185.61
2,166.38
RQ-NAC(4)-5k
0.7400 ± 0.1059
23.57 ± 2.62
0.2263 ± 0.0692
32.8649
0.04392
546.40
671.09
RQ-NAC(8)-5k
0.7637 ± 0.0874
24.80 ± 3.01
0.1821 ± 0.0579
26.3956
0.08784
273.20
356.25
RQ-NAC(16)-5k
0.7832 ± 0.0654
25.00 ± 2.26
0.1519 ± 0.0424
24.8398
0.17569
136.60
179.32
RQ-NAC(4)-20k
0.7779 ± 0.0858
24.92 ± 3.29
0.1541 ± 0.0451
22.4336
0.04392
546.40
627.81
JPEG* (original dataset)
—
—
—
—
0.5107
47.00
—
tance heuristic by assigning higher weights to the meaningful
vehicles occupying larger image regions. An object is consid-
ered correctly detected if it is matched with a prediction of
the same class with IoU ≥0.5.
D. PHY Abstraction and Simulation Framework
We implement the multicast link abstraction using the
system-level PHY abstraction module in Sionna SYS [51]. The
module maps the effective SINR and allocated resource frac-
tion to the number of successfully decoded bits per schedul-
ing interval, denoted by bslot. An inner-loop link adaptation
mechanism is adopted to select the modulation and coding
scheme (MCS) index such that a target BLER is satisfied. The
transmission process follows the block-based model described
in Section III, where the payload is segmented into fixed-
size transmission blocks and delivered using HARQ with a
bounded number of retransmissions. The corresponding PHY
abstraction parameters are summarized in Table II.
For each Monte Carlo iteration, we instantiate a multicast
scenario by sampling: (i) the multicast group size N uniformly
from a scenario-specific range [Nmin, Nmax], (ii) per-user
SINR values γu from a Gaussian distribution N(µγ, σ2
γ) in dB,
and (iii) the number of concurrent multicast flows K uniformly
from [Kmin, Kmax]. The effective SINR γη is computed using
the coverage-based abstraction defined in Section III, and the
effective resource fraction is given by αeff = ρ/K. The end-
to-end deadline Tmax is scenario-dependent, as summarized in
Table III. In our implementation, the quality and latency terms
are normalized within the feasible candidate set using standard
min–max normalization. A single quality weight wq = 0.8
is used across all scenarios, with the corresponding latency
weight given by 1 −wq = 0.2.
Note that the adopted channel model is intended as a
system-level abstraction rather than a time-resolved mobility-
aware channel model. Accordingly, temporally correlated fast
fading, mobility-induced Doppler, detailed inter-cell or co-
channel interference, and CSI estimation or feedback delay
are not explicitly modeled, and the controller assumes that
the current effective SINR estimate is available at the time of
depth selection.
VII. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section evaluates the proposed RQ-NAC framework
under bandwidth-limited vehicular communication scenarios.
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
BPP
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
SSIM ↑
0.025
0.050
0.075
0.100
0.125
BPP
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
LPIPS ↓
RQ-NAC (5k)
RQ-NAC (20k)
DiffEIC
QRes-VAE
HEVC
Fig. 4.
Rate-distortion comparison of RQ-NAC and representative image
compression baselines on the same test set.
We first examine its semantic reconstruction quality, com-
pression efficiency, and entropy coding performance under
different residual quantization depths. We then evaluate the
runtime depth adaptation mechanism under dynamic channel
conditions, followed by downstream object detection and out-
of-distribution accident-scene case studies to verify perception
utility and robustness.
A. Performance of Semantic Compression
1) Performance of Residual Quantization: First, we com-
pare the proposed RQ-NAC with traditional codecs and
learning-based baselines, as shown in Table IV. We include
VQ-VAE as a learning-based baseline, which can be viewed
as a single-stage quantization model. Overall, we observe a
clear trend that increasing the quantization depth consistently
improves reconstruction quality across all perceptual and dis-
tortion metrics. For example, RQ-NAC(16) achieves the best
performance among learned models trained on the 5k subset,
reaching an SSIM of 0.7832, PSNR of 25.00 dB, and LPIPS
of 0.1519, significantly outperforming the VQ-VAE baseline
(SSIM 0.7047, PSNR 22.42 dB). This improvement comes at
the cost of reduced compression efficiency, where the com-
pression ratio decreases from 546.40× at depth 4 to 136.60×
at depth 16, reflecting the trade-off between reconstruction
quality and bitrate.
To further investigate the impact of training data size, we
evaluate a model with quantization depth 4 trained on an
expanded dataset of 20k samples. As shown in Table IV, the
RQ-NAC(4)-20k model achieves comparable reconstruction
performance to the much deeper RQ-NAC(16)-5k variant,
indicating that increasing the amount of training data can


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
10
Fig. 5.
Qualitative comparison of reconstructed images produced by different compression models. The proposed RQ-NAC progressively improves visual
fidelity as the residual quantization depth increases, recovering sharper edges, clearer object contours, and more stable scene structures. This qualitative trend
is consistent with the quantitative results in Table IV.
enhance the model’s representational capacity and improve
the reconstruction quality with lower bitrate overhead. Unless
otherwise specified, all other models are trained on the 5k
subset.
We further compare RQ-NAC with two recent learning-
based image compression methods, DiffEIC [48] and QRes-
VAE [49], as well as HEVC over multiple bitrate operating
points, using the same test set. HEVC is evaluated using
constant rate factor (CRF) values from 36 to 51. As shown
in Fig. 4, RQ-NAC provides competitive rate-distortion per-
formance in the ultra-low-bitrate regime. In particular, after
increasing the training set from 5k to 20k samples, RQ-
NAC(4) achieves an SSIM of 0.7779 and an LPIPS of 0.1541
at approximately 0.04 BPP. At this bitrate, RQ-NAC(4)-
20k achieves substantially lower LPIPS than the considered
learned compression baselines and HEVC, while maintain-
ing competitive SSIM. HEVC requires a considerably higher
bitrate to approach a similar perceptual-quality level. This
improvement is achieved without changing the quantization
depth or representation size, suggesting that the performance
of the current RQ-NAC models is strongly influenced by the
available training scale rather than being fundamentally limited
by the residual-quantization architecture.
Fig. 5 presents a qualitative comparison of reconstructed
images produced by different models. The VQ-VAE baseline
exhibits noticeable distortion and global blurriness, which
degrade perceptual quality and hinder semantic interpretation
of scene details such as vehicle contours and road boundaries.
In contrast, the proposed RQ-NAC with depth 4 effectively
preserves the overall scene structure and eliminates most
1
2
3
N­Gram
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
Compression Ratio
Depth 4
Depth 8
Depth 16
(a) Impact of n-gram order.
1
0.1
0.01
1.200
1.225
1.250
1.275
1.300
1.325
Compression Ratio
Depth 4
Depth 8
Depth 16
(b) Impact of coefficient α.
Fig. 6.
Parametric study on compression ratio under different quantization
depths.
visible artifacts, although the reconstruction remains slightly
blurred due to limited quantization depth. Increasing the resid-
ual quantization depth further enhances visual fidelity: RQ-
NAC(8) and RQ-NAC(16) recover finer textures and sharper
edges, producing images that are perceptually closer to the
ground truth. These results confirm that hierarchical residual
quantization enables a clear trade-off between compression ef-
ficiency and perceptual quality, with deeper models achieving
more faithful semantic reconstruction.
2) Performance of Entropy-based Lossless Compression:
We then evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed context-
adaptive entropy coding model under different n-gram orders
and quantization depths. Fig. 6a presents the resulting stage-
2 compression ratios across different quantization depths. We
observe that even without the contextual modeling (n = 1),
applying AC directly yields a notable compression ratio of ap-
proximately 1.15×, demonstrating the redundancy present in
the latent space. When incorporating a 2-gram context model,


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
11
TABLE V
PROFILING RESULTS OF COMPRESSION AND RESTORATION.
Depth
Compress (ms)
Restore (ms)
RQ-VAE
NAC
RQ-VAE
NAC
RQ-NAC(4)
119.0571
15.7462
196.3354
114.7885
RQ-NAC(8)
120.4951
22.8375
195.2968
205.2417
RQ-NAC(16)
120.2094
36.4351
195.3817
475.0927
Cruise
Junction
Collision
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ratio
Adaptive success
Adaptive deadline
JPEG success
JPEG deadline
(a) Success and deadline-
meet ratios.
Cruise
Junction
Collision
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
E2E latency (s)
Adaptive all
Adaptive timely
JPEG all
JPEG timely
(b)
Average end-to-end
latency.
Cruise
Junction
Collision
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
TX latency (s)
Adaptive all
Adaptive timely
JPEG all
JPEG timely
(c) Average transmission
latency.
Fig. 7.
Performance comparison between the proposed model adaptation
method and the baseline under the three scenarios. “success” indicates the
completion success ratio, and “deadline” indicates the deadline-meet ratio.
“all” refers to averages computed over all successful transmissions, whereas
“timely” refers to averages computed over deadline-satisfied transmissions.
the compression ratio improves significantly to around 1.3×,
indicating that short-range dependencies between adjacent
code symbols can be further leveraged to enhance compression
performance. However, the 3-gram case leads to a degradation
in compression efficiency because the estimated empirical
frequencies ˜P(st | ct) deviate from the true probabilities
P(st | ct) under limited data. The exponentially growing
context space causes such data sparsity, leading to unreliable
and nearly uniform estimates that increase entropy and reduce
compression efficiency. In theory, higher-order n-grams can
yield better compression as they more accurately model local
dependencies, but require significantly larger datasets to avoid
context sparsity and maintain reliable probability estimates.
Besides, both the storage and lookup cost for frequency
tables grow exponentially with n, which can quickly become
impractical for resource-constrained applications.
To mitigate sparsity, we evaluate additive smoothing with
α ∈{1, 0.1, 0.01} under the 2-gram model. As shown in
Fig. 6b, varying α results in only marginal compression
differences across quantization depths, with α = 0.1 slightly
outperforming others at depth of 4 and 8. We therefore adopt
α = 0.1 as the default, and all “w/ AC” results in Table IV
use this configuration. While VQ-VAE may exhibit degraded
performance with n-gram modeling due to its relatively short
latent sequences, which limit the effectiveness of context-
based estimation and can introduce estimation bias, 2-gram
modeling is most effective for our RQ-NAC, achieving up
to 671.09× compression at depth of 4 with high perceptual
quality.
B. Adaptive Performance under Dynamic Channel Conditions
1) Profiling Results and System Efficiency: To evaluate the
practical deployment cost of the proposed SemCom pipeline,
we first profile the runtime performance of both the compres-
sion and restoration modules under an edge computing setting.
TABLE VI
MODEL SELECTION RATIO UNDER DIFFERENT VEHICULAR SCENARIOS.
Scenario
Selected Model
RQ-NAC(4)
RQ-NAC(8)
RQ-NAC(16)
Cruise
0.4%
0.0%
99.6%
Junction
3.1%
96.9%
0.0%
Collision
100.0%
0.0%
0.0%
The dataset provides source images in JPEG format, which
serve as the common source data for both methods. The JPEG
baseline directly transmits the provided JPEG files, while
RQ-NAC decodes them into RGB images before semantic
encoding. The reported runtime for RQ-NAC includes the
computational overhead of semantic compression and decod-
ing modules.
Table V reports the average per-image processing latency
of each component, including the RQ-VAE-based semantic
encoder/decoder and the NAC entropy coding/decoding mod-
ules, across different RQ depths. We observe that the semantic
encoding time remains relatively stable (approximately 120
ms) across different RQ depths. This is because the main
computational cost of semantic encoding lies in the convolu-
tional backbone used to extract the latent feature map, which
is executed only once per image and does not scale with the
RQ depth. A larger RQ depth mainly introduces additional
codeword lookup and residual index generation on the latent
features, whose overhead is relatively minor compared with
the backbone inference.
In contrast, the entropy coding overhead increases with the
RQ depth due to the longer latent index sequences, particularly
on the decoder side where the NAC part restoration becomes
the dominant cost at higher RQ depths. Overall, the profiling
results show that the RQ-VAE encoding latency remains nearly
constant across RQ depths, whereas the NAC decoding cost
increases with the length of the latent index sequence. Even
at higher depths, the system maintains tractable latency at
hundreds of millisecond level, making it suitable for near-real-
time deployment in bandwidth-constrained vehicular network
environments.
2) Performance of Model Adaptation: Fig. 7 and Table VI
show that the selected RQ depth varies across the three oper-
ating scenarios as communication load and latency constraints
change. In low-density Cruise scenarios, the vehicle controller
predominantly selects the deepest configuration, indicating
that the communication condition is sufficient to support
higher-fidelity semantic transmission. In Junction scenarios,
the selected RQ depth shifts to an intermediate operating
point, reflecting the need to balance reconstruction quality
and communication efficiency under moderate multicast load.
In Collision scenarios, the controller consistently favors the
shallowest configuration, prioritizing compactness and fast
delivery under the most stringent communication conditions.
This trend confirms that the proposed adaptation mechanism
in Sec. V is able to adjust the semantic bitrate according to the
effective multicast capacity and application deadline, without
requiring model retraining or online optimization.


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
12
TABLE VII
VEHICULAR OBJECT DETECTION PERFORMANCE UNDER DIFFERENT RECONSTRUCTION DEPTHS USING PRETRAINED AND FINE-TUNED YOLOV8N
DETECTORS ON THE TEST110 DATASET. IN ADDITION TO STANDARD METRICS, WE REPORT A WEIGHTED DETECTION SCORE (WDS), WHERE OBJECT
IMPORTANCE IS APPROXIMATED BY BOUNDING-BOX AREA.
Configuration
Pretrained YOLOv8n
Fine-tuned YOLOv8n
Prec.
Rec.
mAP50
mAP50-95
Prec.
Rec.
mAP50
mAP50-95
WDS
VQ-VAE
0.695
0.467
0.516
0.298
0.778
0.615
0.673
0.398
0.767
RQ-NAC(4)
0.631
0.631
0.621
0.394
0.765
0.714
0.785
0.502
0.820
RQ-NAC(8)
0.675
0.674
0.689
0.475
0.819
0.747
0.843
0.578
0.886
RQ-NAC(16)
0.710
0.739
0.733
0.523
0.861
0.781
0.880
0.633
0.897
JPEG (Original)
0.752
0.757
0.761
0.575
0.832
0.868
0.929
0.691
0.932
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
(a) Mean SINR (dB)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ratio
500 7501000
1500
2000
(b) Deadline (ms)
1510 20
50
100
(c) Receiver count
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Ratio
1 2
4
8
12
16
20
(d) Concurrent flows
d=4
d=8
d=16
RQ-NAC
JPEG
Selection ratio:
Deadline-meet ratio:
d=4
d=8
d=16
RQ-NAC
JPEG
Fig. 8. Controller behavior under controlled variations of channel and system
conditions in the Junction scenario.
3) Sensitivity Analysis: To further verify that this behavior
is not a fixed mapping from scenario labels to quantization
depths, Fig. 8 evaluates the controller within the same Junction
scenario while independently varying channel and system con-
ditions. As the available latency budget increases in Fig. 8(b),
the selected operating point progressively shifts from shallow
to deeper quantization, reflecting the increased opportunity to
preserve semantic fidelity. A similar tendency is observed as
the effective channel quality improves or the number of con-
current flows decreases, as shown in Fig. 8(a) and in Fig. 8(d),
respectively. In contrast, variations in the receiver popula-
tion have a comparatively smaller effect under the adopted
coverage-quantile multicast abstraction (Fig. 8(c)), because the
receiver population primarily influences the sampled lower-
tail SINR rather than directly reducing the per-flow resource
fraction. These controlled experiments demonstrate that the
selected RQ depth is driven by instantaneous communication
constraints rather than by the specific scenario.
The latency results further highlight the trade-off between
communication efficiency and semantic processing overhead.
RQ-NAC substantially reduces transmission latency because
its semantic representations require fewer transmitted bits than
0.80
0.90
0.95 0.99
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Deadline-meet ratio
Cruise
RQ-NAC
JPEG
0.80
0.90
0.95 0.99
Junction
0.80
0.90
0.95 0.99
Collision
Coverage target η
Fig. 9. Sensitivity of the deadline-meet ratio to the target receiver coverage
ratio η under different scenarios.
the baselines. Its end-to-end latency additionally includes neu-
ral encoding, decoding, and entropy-coding overhead, which
can make the conditional latency of successfully delivered
JPEG samples smaller in the less constrained scenarios. How-
ever, those JPEG results are obtained from a much smaller sub-
set of transmissions that complete successfully and within the
deadline. Under the most stringent Collision setting, RQ-NAC
simultaneously provides higher timely-delivery reliability and
lower end-to-end latency, illustrating the benefit of adaptive
semantic compression when communication resources are
severely limited.
We also investigated the impact of the target receiver
coverage ratio η on the deadline-meet performance in Fig. 9.
As η increases, it is observed that the effective multicast
SINR becomes more conservative, leading to lower deadline-
meet ratios, particularly under the stringent Collision scenario.
However, the proposed adaptive RQ-NAC consistently outper-
forms JPEG across all tested coverage targets, indicating that
its relative reliability advantage is preserved under different
multicast coverage requirements.
C. Perception Performance with Semantic Applications
To evaluate whether the reconstructed semantic images
remain useful for downstream perception, we conduct a task-
oriented evaluation using a YOLOv8n object detector. We
consider two settings: (i) a pretrained detector without adapta-
tion, and (ii) a fine-tuned detector trained on original images
captured by vehicles to mitigate domain shift. We construct
a controlled test set consisting of 110 dashcam images, with
1–3 near-field vehicles annotated per image. The same set of
images is used across all compression levels to ensure a fair
comparison. For the pretrained setting, we directly evaluate a
YOLOv8n model pretrained on the COCO dataset [52]. For the
fine-tuned setting, we train a single-class vehicle detector on
a separate dataset of original images with no overlap with the


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
13
Ground Truth
RQ-NAC (4)
RQ-NAC (16)
Fig. 10.
Case study on unseen accident scenes. RQ-NAC maintains strong
reconstruction quality under distribution shift, with deeper quantization pre-
serving finer visual details, including clearer traffic lights and object bound-
aries.
test set, and select the best checkpoint using an independent
validation set of 40 images based on validation mAP50−95.
Detection performance is evaluated using the metrics defined
in Section VI-C, including precision, recall, mAP, and WDS.
As shown in Table VII, detection performance improves
consistently as the residual quantization depth increases, in-
dicating that deeper RQ-NAC reconstructions preserve more
task-relevant visual structures. Under the pretrained detector,
RQ-NAC substantially outperforms VQ-VAE and approaches
the original JPEG baseline, demonstrating the benefit of hi-
erarchical residual quantization for downstream perception.
After fine-tuning on domain-specific vehicular data, detec-
tion performance further improves across all compression
levels. In particular, RQ-NAC(16) achieves an mAP50 of
0.880 and even surpasses the original baseline in precision,
suggesting that the reconstructed semantic images can retain
highly discriminative object structures for vehicle detection.
RQ-NAC(8) also maintains strong performance, showing that
moderate reconstruction depth can provide a favorable balance
between compression and perception quality. However, the
original JPEG baseline retains the highest overall mAP50 and
mAP50−95, indicating a tradeoff between perception fidelity
and transmission payload.
The WDS results further confirm that higher reconstruction
depth better preserves objects assigned higher importance
scores. RQ-NAC improves WDS monotonically with depth
and reaches 0.897 at depth 16, remaining close to the original
baseline. This indicates that the proposed semantic compres-
sion retains information associated with vehicles occupying
larger image regions when sufficient residual refinement is
used. These results show that RQ-NAC preserves downstream
perception utility under semantic compression, while domain-
adaptive fine-tuning further improves robustness to reconstruc-
tion artifacts in vehicular perception applications.
D. Robustness under Distribution Shift
To evaluate the generalization ability of RQ-NAC under
distribution shift, we conduct a case study using a new Car
Crash Dataset [47], which contains real-world accident scenes
not seen during training. We directly apply two RQ-NAC
models pretrained on the original vehicular dataset, with RQ
depths of 4 and 16, without any fine-tuning. As shown in
TABLE VIII
QUANTITATIVE RESULTS OF THE OUT-OF-DISTRIBUTION CASE STUDY.
Configuration
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
2-gram AC Gain↑
RQ-NAC(4)
0.6764
0.2752
1.2137×
RQ-NAC(16)
0.7369
0.2067
1.3068×
Fig. 10, both models preserve the main scene structures under
this unseen domain. The depth-4 model retains major elements
such as vehicle outlines, traffic lights, and road structures,
while the depth-16 model reconstructs finer details including
object textures and sharper edges.
Table VIII further reports the reconstruction quality together
with the additional compression gain achieved by NAC. Since
the latent representation dimensions remain unchanged for
a given RQ depth, the compression ratio before arithmetic
coding is identical to that reported in Table IV. We therefore
evaluate the robustness of the entropy model by directly
applying the same 2-gram frequency table learned from the
original training data to the unseen Car Crash Dataset, without
updating or re-estimating the table. The NAC gain remains
above 1.2× for both configurations and is close to the cor-
responding results on the original test set in Fig. 6, showing
that the fixed 2-gram frequency table remains effective on the
tested unseen accident scenes without re-estimation.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a resilient and adaptive visual
semantic communication framework for vehicular networks.
By integrating residual quantization with a lightweight depth
adaptation mechanism, the proposed approach enables flexi-
ble trade-offs between semantic fidelity and communication
efficiency under dynamic network conditions. In addition,
we adopt a perception-aware evaluation framework that em-
phasizes downstream task utility in safety-critical scenarios.
Through system-level evaluation, the proposed method demon-
strates significant improvements in delivery reliability and
timely transmission compared with traditional image transmis-
sion approaches, while maintaining low-latency operation and
robust object detection performance. The results also indicate
that adaptive semantic compression can effectively mitigate the
impact of channel variability and network congestion, leading
to more robust visual information delivery in diverse vehicular
application environments.
IX. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the National Science Foun-
dation through Award CNS–2440756, CNS–2312138, and
NVIDIA Academic Program Grant.
REFERENCES
[1] Khadija Ashraf, Vignesh Varadarajan, MD Rashed Rahman, Ryan
Walden, and Ashwin Ashok, “See-through a vehicle: Augmenting road
safety information using visual perception and camera communication
in vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no.
4, pp. 3071–3086, 2021.


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
14
[2] Zhouyu Li, Pinxiang Wang, Xiaochun Liang, Xuanhao Luo, Yuchen
Liu, Xiaojian Wang, Huayue Gu, and Ruozhou Yu, “Adaorb: Adapting
in-orbit analytics models for location-aware earth observation tasks,”
in 2025 IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and
Communications (PerCom). IEEE, 2025, pp. 208–214.
[3] Wuyang Zhang, Sugang Li, Luyang Liu, Zhenhua Jia, Yanyong Zhang,
and Dipankar Raychaudhuri, “Hetero-edge: Orchestration of real-time
vision applications on heterogeneous edge clouds,” in IEEE INFOCOM
2019-IEEE Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 2019, pp.
1270–1278.
[4] Himlun Bista, I-Ling Yen, Farokh Bastani, Martin Mueller, and Darnell
Moore, “Semantic-based information sharing in vehicular networks,” in
2018 IEEE International Conference on Web Services (ICWS). IEEE,
2018, pp. 282–289.
[5] Xuanhao Luo, Yong Feng, and Chengdong Wang, “A clothoid curve-
based intersection collision warning scheme in internet of vehicles,” The
Computer Journal, vol. 66, no. 10, pp. 2447–2461, 2023.
[6] Hong Zhong, Li Wang, Jie Cui, Jing Zhang, and Irina Bolodurina,
“Secure edge computing-assisted video reporting service in 5g-enabled
vehicular networks,” IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and
Security, vol. 18, pp. 3774–3786, 2023.
[7] Wei Gao, Celimuge Wu, Lei Zhong, and Kok-Lim Alvin Yau, “Commu-
nication resources management based on spectrum sensing for vehicle
platooning,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems,
vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 2251–2264, 2022.
[8] Tilahun M Getu, Georges Kaddoum, and Mehdi Bennis,
“Semantic
communication: A survey on research landscape, challenges, and future
directions,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 112, no. 11, pp. 1649–1685,
2025.
[9] Jialong Xu, Tze-Yang Tung, Bo Ai, Wei Chen, Yuxuan Sun, and Deniz
G¨und¨uz, “Deep joint source-channel coding for semantic communica-
tions,”
IEEE communications Magazine, vol. 61, no. 11, pp. 42–48,
2023.
[10] Shunpu Tang, Qianqian Yang, Jihong Park, Zhaoyang Zhang, Kaibin
Huang, and Deniz Gunduz,
“Cache-enabled generative joint source-
channel coding for evolving semantic communications,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2603.17702, 2026.
[11] Eirina Bourtsoulatze, David Burth Kurka, and Deniz G¨und¨uz, “Deep
joint source-channel coding for wireless image transmission,”
IEEE
Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 5, no.
3, pp. 567–579, 2019.
[12] Shunpu Tang, Qianqian Yang, Deniz G¨und¨uz, and Zhaoyang Zhang,
“Evolving semantic communication with generative modelling,” in 2024
IEEE 35th International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile
Radio Communications (PIMRC). IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–6.
[13] Shunpu Tang, Yuanyuan Jia, Qianqian Yang, Ruichen Zhang, Jihong
Park, and Dusit Niyato,
“Enabling training-free semantic commu-
nication systems with generative diffusion models,”
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.01209, 2025.
[14] Chongtao Guo, Le Liang, and Geoffrey Ye Li, “Resource allocation for
vehicular communications with low latency and high reliability,” IEEE
transactions on wireless communications, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 3887–3902,
2019.
[15] Liang Wang, Hao Ye, Le Liang, and Geoffrey Ye Li, “Learn to compress
csi and allocate resources in vehicular networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Communications, vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 3640–3653, 2020.
[16] Xuanhao Luo, Jiayuan Huang, Longyu Zhou, Mingzhe Chen, and
Yuchen Liu, “Sparsepilot: Belief-guided network planning under sparse
wireless measurements,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.09199, 2026.
[17] Wenjun Xu, Yimeng Zhang, Fengyu Wang, Zhijin Qin, Chenyao Liu, and
Ping Zhang, “Semantic communication for the internet of vehicles: A
multiuser cooperative approach,” IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 100–109, 2023.
[18] Baoxia Du, Hongyang Du, Dusit Niyato, and Ruidong Li,
“Task-
oriented semantic communication in large multimodal models-based
vehicle networks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2025.
[19] Yifan Yuan, Jingxuan Zhang, Xiaodong Xu, Bizhu Wang, Shujun Han,
Mengying Sun, and Ping Zhang, “Learning-based task-centric multi-
user semantic communication solution for vehicle networks,”
IEEE
Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 2025.
[20] Wanting Yang, Hongyang Du, Zi Qin Liew, Wei Yang Bryan Lim, Zehui
Xiong, Dusit Niyato, Xuefen Chi, Xuemin Shen, and Chunyan Miao,
“Semantic communications for future internet: Fundamentals, applica-
tions, and challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol.
25, no. 1, pp. 213–250, 2022.
[21] Shaolong Guo, Yuntao Wang, Ning Zhang, Zhou Su, Tom H Luan,
Zhiyi Tian, and Xuemin Shen, “A survey on semantic communication
networks: Architecture, security, and privacy,” IEEE communications
surveys & tutorials, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 2860–2894, 2024.
[22] Huiqiang Xie, Zhijin Qin, Xiaoming Tao, and Khaled B Letaief, “Task-
oriented multi-user semantic communications,” IEEE Journal on Se-
lected Areas in Communications, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 2584–2597, 2022.
[23] Maheshi U Lokumarambage, Vishnu Sai Sankeerth Gowrisetty, Hossein
Rezaei, Thushan Sivalingam, Nandana Rajatheva, and Anil Fernando,
“Wireless end-to-end image transmission system using semantic com-
munications,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 37149–37163, 2023.
[24] Zhijin Qin, Xiaoming Tao, Jianhua Lu, Wen Tong, and Geoffrey Ye Li,
“Semantic communications: Principles and challenges,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.01389, 2021.
[25] Deniz G¨und¨uz, Mich`ele A Wigger, Tze-Yang Tung, Ping Zhang, and
Yong Xiao,
“Joint source–channel coding: Fundamentals and recent
progress in practical designs,” Proceedings of the IEEE, 2024.
[26] Mingyu Yang, Chenghong Bian, and Hun-Seok Kim, “Deep joint source
channel coding for wireless image transmission with ofdm,”
in ICC
2021-IEEE International Conference on Communications. IEEE, 2021,
pp. 1–6.
[27] Yucheng Sheng, Le Liang, Hao Ye, Shi Jin, and Geoffrey Ye Li,
“Semantic communication for cooperative perception using harq,” IEEE
Transactions on Cognitive Communications and Networking, vol. 12, pp.
1139–1154, 2025.
[28] Yanghe Pan, Yuntao Wang, Shaolong Guo, Chengyu Yin, Ruidong
Li, Zhou Su, and Yuan Wu,
“Trustworthy semantic communication
for vehicular networks: Challenges and solutions,”
IEEE Vehicular
Technology Magazine, 2025.
[29] Ian J Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David
Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio, “Gen-
erative adversarial nets,”
Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 27, 2014.
[30] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling,
“Auto-encoding variational
bayes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.6114, 2013.
[31] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion prob-
abilistic models,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
vol. 33, pp. 6840–6851, 2020.
[32] Fenglian Pan, Yinwei Zhang, Jian Liu, Larry Head, Maria Elli, and
Ignacio Alvarez, “Reliability modeling for perception systems in au-
tonomous vehicles: A recursive event-triggering point process approach,”
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, vol. 169, pp.
104868, 2024.
[33] Qiyu Hu, Guangyi Zhang, Zhijin Qin, Yunlong Cai, Guanding Yu, and
Geoffrey Ye Li, “Robust semantic communications with masked vq-vae
enabled codebook,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications,
vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 8707–8722, 2023.
[34] Aaron Van Den Oord, Oriol Vinyals, et al., “Neural discrete representa-
tion learning,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol.
30, 2017.
[35] Ke-Hong Chen and Yih-Chuan Lin,
“Adaptive vqvae: a learning-
based image compression framework with vector quantization,”
in
Proceedings of the 2023 11th International Conference on Computer
and Communications Management, 2023, pp. 76–82.
[36] Doyup Lee, Chiheon Kim, Saehoon Kim, Minsu Cho, and Wook-Shin
Han,
“Autoregressive image generation using residual quantization,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 11523–11532.
[37] Xuanhao Luo, Ruichen Gao, Zhizhen Li, Mingzhe Chen, and Yuchen
Liu,
“Channel-agnostic semantic compression for bandwidth-limited
visual communication,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.00394, 2026.
[38] 3GPP, “Nr; medium access control (mac) protocol specification,” 2022.
[39] Chandra Shekhara Kaushik Valmeekam, Krishna Narayanan, Dileep
Kalathil, Jean-Francois Chamberland, and Srinivas Shakkottai, “Llmzip:
Lossless text compression using large language models,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.04050, 2023.
[40] Xuanhao Luo, Zhiyuan Peng, Zhouyu Li, Ruozhou Yu, and Yuchen
Liu, “Rank-based modeling for universal packets compression in multi-
modal communications,” in 2025 IEEE 26th International Symposium
on a World of Wireless, Mobile and Multimedia Networks (WoWMoM).
IEEE, 2025, pp. 249–258.
[41] Xuanhao Luo, Zhouyu Li, Mingzhe Chen, Ruozhou Yu, Shiwen Mao,
and Yuchen Liu, “Unified packet compression and model adaptation for
integrated sensing and multi-modal communications,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications, 2025.
[42] Stanley F Chen and Joshua Goodman, “An empirical study of smoothing
techniques for language modeling,” Computer Speech & Language, vol.
13, no. 4, pp. 359–394, 1999.


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, 2025
15
[43] Glenn Jocher, Ayush Chaurasia, and Jing Qiu,
“Ultralytics yolov8,”
2023.
[44] Zhaohui Zheng, Ping Wang, Wei Liu, Jinze Li, Rongguang Ye, and
Dongwei Ren,
“Distance-iou loss: Faster and better learning for
bounding box regression,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on
artificial intelligence, 2020, vol. 34, pp. 12993–13000.
[45] Xiang Li, Wenhai Wang, Lijun Wu, Shuo Chen, Xiaolin Hu, Jun Li,
Jinhui Tang, and Jian Yang, “Generalized focal loss: Learning qualified
and distributed bounding boxes for dense object detection,” Advances in
neural information processing systems, vol. 33, pp. 21002–21012, 2020.
[46] “100K Vehicle Dashcam Image Dataset,” Kaggle,
Accessed: 2026.
URL: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/mdfahimbinamin/100k-vehicle-
dashcam-image-dataset/data.
[47] “Car
Crash
Dataset
(CCD),”
Kaggle,
Accessed:
2026.
URL:
https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/asefjamilajwad/car-crash-dataset-ccd.
[48] Zhiyuan Li, Yanhui Zhou, Hao Wei, Chenyang Ge, and Jingwen Jiang,
“Toward extreme image compression with latent feature guidance and
diffusion prior,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video
Technology, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 888–899, 2024.
[49] Zhihao Duan, Ming Lu, Zhan Ma, and Fengqing Zhu, “Lossy image
compression with quantized hierarchical vaes,”
in 2023 IEEE/CVF
Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV). IEEE,
2023, pp. 198–207.
[50] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard
Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter,
“Gans trained by a two time-scale
update rule converge to a local nash equilibrium,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[51] Jakob Hoydis, Sebastian Cammerer, Fayc¸al Ait Aoudia, Avinash Vem,
Nikolaus Binder, Guillermo Marcus, and Alexander Keller, “Sionna: An
open-source library for next-generation physical layer research,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.11854, 2022.
[52] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays, Pietro Per-
ona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Doll´ar, and C Lawrence Zitnick, “Microsoft
coco: Common objects in context,” in European conference on computer
vision. Springer, 2014, pp. 740–755.
