Title: Beyond Convolution: Advancing Hypergraph Neural Networks with Hypergraph U-Nets

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.09051v1

Published Time: Tue, 09 Jun 2026 01:45:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 1

# Beyond Convolution: Advancing Hypergraph Neural Networks with Hypergraph U-Nets 

## Fuli Wang, Student Member, IEEE, Wei Qian, Daniel L Lau, Fellow, IEEE, 

## and Gonzalo R. Arce, Life Fellow, IEEE 

✦

Abstract —Convolutions have successfully transitioned from image pro-cessing to the complex realm of non-Euclidean higher-order domains, particularly in hypergraphs. Despite the success in convolution, the exploration of a popular architecture named U-Net remains largely unexplored for hypergraph data due to the lack of well-defined pool-ing and unpooling operations. This work pioneers the study of U-Net architectures for hypergraph data, addressing the critical challenge of designing effective pooling and unpooling operations that retain maximal structural information from the input hypergraph. Motivated by hierar-chical clustering, we propose to construct the pooling and unpooling operators all at once by cutting the clustering dendrogram at different granularities, named the Parallel Hierarchical Pooling (PHPool) and Unpooling (PHUnpool) operators. Unlike existing pooling methods that risk local structural damage through a sequential learning procedure, our PHPool operators are designed in a global and parallel manner to ensure fidelity to the original hypergraph structure with efficient com-putation while the PHUnpool operators are tailored to perform inverse operations of the PHPools for hypergraph reconstruction. We validate our model through hypergraph reconstruction simulation, hypergraph classification, and node-level anomaly detection, where it demonstrates superior performance over existing state-of-the-art graph and hyper-graph deep learning methods. 

Index Terms —Geometric deep learning, hypergraph neural networks, hypergraph U-nets, convolution, hierarchical pooling 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

# RECENTLY , there has been a surge of interest in the development of deep learning architectures on network data. Compared to simple graphs that only account for pair-wise interactions between two nodes, hypergraph provides a general representation of multi-way relations that are widespread in complex systems [1], [2]. For example, human pose estimations with joint parts represented in hypergraph yield coordinated movement [3], [4]. Recommendation sys-tems with hypergraph modeling co-purchased items lead 

F. Wang is with the Institute for Financial Services Analytics, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, 19716, USA W. Qian is with the Department of Applied Economics and Statistics, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, 19716, USA D. L. Lau is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506 USA G. R. Arce is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, 19716, USA This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation under grants 1815992, 1816003, and 2413833, the AFOSR award FA9550-22-1-0362 and by the Institute of Financial Services Analytics, co-sponsored by JP Morgan Chase & Co. Hypergraph representation 

> Skip connections
> Decoder Encoder
> Pooling
> Convolution
> Pooling
> Convolution
> Pooling
> Convolution
> Unpooling
> Convolution
> Unpooling
> Convolution
> Unpooling
> Convolution

Fig. 1. Architecture of the proposed HyperGraph U-Net. Each layer in the encoder performs pooling and convolution; the output of the encoder is a “supernode" representing the overall hypergraph, and it is further fed into a decoder to reconstruct the original hypergraph through convo-lution and unpooling. To combine high-resolution features from earlier layers, skip connections from corresponding encoder layers are added to decoder layers. Note that the figure ignores signals for simplicity. 

to a more coherent understanding of user intents [5], [6]. Gene expression imputation with hypergraphs that depict multi-tissue references imposes superior performance for capturing groups of related genes [7]. With the rise of hypergraph structures, designing deep learning architectures that can effectively process hyper-graph data has become a central research focus. Most hyper-graph neural networks (HyperGNNs) [8], [9], [10], [11], [12], [13] follow convolutional or message-passing paradigms, aggregating and transforming features from incident nodes and hyperedges to produce node embeddings. While these representations excel at node-level tasks such as classifica-tion, they exhibit critical shortcomings when extended to hypergraph-level objectives that demand a single, global embedding. A flat readout that uniformly pools all node embeddings often washes out vital local and mesoscale structures. For example, summing across communities in a social hypergraph can dilute community-specific signals [14], [15], and coarse node-wise pooling in molecular hy-pergraphs may obscure key bonds and functional substruc-tures. Moreover, even for purely node-level predictions, convolutional HyperGNNs can suffer from an exponen-tially decaying effective receptive field, which makes deeper stacking of convolutional layers increasingly ineffective [16]. Hierarchical pooling counteracts these issues by coarsening the topology, expanding each node’s receptive field with  

> arXiv:2606.09051v1 [cs.LG] 8 Jun 2026 JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2

fewer layers, and preserving multi-scale structure. Empiri-cally, U-Net style graph architectures that interleave pooling and unpooling have achieved state-of-the-art performance on long-range node classification benchmarks, which under-scores the value of global context even when supervision is local [17], [18], [19]. Motivated by these insights, we investigate hypergraph pooling both as a means to obtain powerful hypergraph-level embeddings and as a tool to enhance node-level performance. We propose to enhance convolutional Hyper-GNNs with hierarchical node pooling and unpooling layers, named HyperGraph U-Net ( HGUN ). As shown in Fig. 1, the HGUN follows an encoder-decoder architecture. The encoder takes a hypergraph and its signals as input and then condenses the hypergraph along with node representations, learned by convolution, into a smaller hypergraph. The HGUN encoder outputs a super-node/hypergraph embed-ding that leverages coarse-grained local structures and can be used to perform hypergraph-level tasks. When node-level embedding is necessary, the HGUN decoder then takes the latent low-dimensional representation of the hypergraph and restores the hypergraph structure through unpooling and convolution. Analogously to the U-Nets in the im-age [20], the corresponding layer-wise features from the encoder are injected into the decoder through skip connec-tions [21]. By varying hypergraph sizes from pooling and unpooling operations, HGUN provides a notion of spatial locality on hypergraphs, amplifies the receptive fields [22] of an input hypergraph, leading to better generalization performance [23] and more robust node embeddings. Specifically, we design the pooling and unpooling oper-ations from a lens of hierarchical clustering on hypergraphs, as the idea of hierarchical node clustering perfectly matches coarse-grained structure exploitation. By a greedy algorithm on selecting the optimal coarse-grained structure from a hierarchical tree, the clustering assignments at different res-olution levels are generated all at once, entailing the Parallel Hierarchical Pooling (PHPool) and Unpooling (PHUnpool) operations that bear less risk of information loss. While the proposed PHPool and PHUnpool operations can be combined with any convolutional HyperGNNs, we also introduce a novel HyperGraph CROSS Convolution (HGX-Conv) layer that models higher-order joint effect through cross-node polynomials. The formulation of HGXConv is motivated by the recent work in tensor HyperGNNs [13], where a cross-node interaction tensor is constructed to model collective node relationships within hyperedges. In summary, we highlight our contribution as follows:  

> •

We present HyperGraph U-Net ( HGUN ), a general hypergraph autoencoder framework that is not only effective for node-level tasks but also for hypergraph-level tasks, to the best of our knowledge, the first systematic HyperGNN U-Net framework with explicit hypergraph pooling and unpooling operations.  

> •

We introduce Parallel Hierarchical Pooling ( PHPool )and Unpooling operations, which select the most promising coarse-grained structures all at once to al-leviate topological distortion in sequential processing.  

> •

We propose a new HyperGraph Cross Convolution (HGXConv ) operation, which propagates node infor-

> Fig. 2. Comparison between sequential pooling and parallel pooling. Parallel pooling preserves at least as much information as sequential pooling under the assumptions of Proposition 4 in Section 5.4.

mation to hyperedges with cross-node multiplication to capture higher-order mixed effects. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. We first review related work on hypergraph neural networks in Section II, followed by the preliminaries of hypergraphs in Section III. Then, the proposed hypergraph U-Net archi-tecture is introduced in Section IV, and theoretical analysis is conducted in Section V. Experimental results including simulation and real-world applications are provided in Sec-tion VI. We conclude this paper and discuss future work in Section VII. 

## 2 RELATED WORK 

In this section, we review prior work on hypergraph neural networks (HyperGNNs), hierarchical pooling in U-Nets, and hierarchical clustering on non-Euclidean data. 

2.1 Hypergraph Neural Networks (HyperGNNs) 

A wide variety of HyperGNNs have been proposed in recent years, including methods inspired by hypergraph reductions [8], [9], two-stage propagation [1], [10], [11], [12], [24] and tensor hypergraph signal processing [13], [25]. Despite different motivations and foundations introduced in these approaches, most of them fall in the framework of convolution [26] or neural message passing [27], where node embeddings are iteratively computed by aggregating node features from their neighborhood. Such a flat aggre-gation paradigm that keeps node size unchanged has a limitation: it overlooks hierarchical coarse-grained informa-tion and so less likely to capture important group-wise properties widely spread in real-world applications [28]. As a response, we propose pooling and unpooling layers by leveraging hierarchical clustering for hypergraphs and further strengthening cross-node message passing within hyperedge groups. 

2.2 Hierarchical Pooling in Graph U-Nets 

The basic building blocks in graph u-nets are pooling and convolution. Here, we focus on pooling layers where hier-archical node pooling methods aim to gradually coarsen the network structure into a smaller-sized graph while preserv-ing the original structural information. Hierarchical node pooling can be classified into node drop pooling and node cluster pooling. As suggested by these two names, node drop pooling methods (TopKPool [17], SAGPool [29], SOD-Pool [30], etc.) select the most important nodes by learning a score function and discard unselected nodes. Though ef-ficient, node-drop pooling would result in information loss and isolated subgraphs, which could damage graph local JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3

structures and cause sparse connectivities, especially after stacking several layers. Thus, a more common design is pro-posed based on the clustering of nodes. DiffPool [14] learns a cluster assignment (i.e., pooling mapping) from graph neural networks, MinCutPool [31] relaxes the constraints for spectral clustering and designs a clustering-based loss function to enforce ideal clusters, and HoscPool [32] fur-ther extends the spectral clustering loss function to edge and triangle motifs. Another line of work [33], [34] draws inspiration from the compressive Haar transform to filter out less important node features. Although mitigating information loss, most node drop and node cluster pooling methods employ a sequential pooling procedure, which could excessively compress in-formation as the depth of the neural network increases. With the conceptual difference illustrated in Fig. 2, the mutual information between the original hypergraph and the pooled hypergraphs in a sequential data processing pipeline tends to be less than that in a parallel pooling pro-cedure (see Proposition 4 in subsection 5.4). Consequently, we propose a method to simultaneously learn the clustering assignments for all layers by selecting appropriate clusters from a hierarchical clustering dendrogram. Such parallel pooling reduces information loss compared to sequential processing because it captures more of the original data’s information by directly deriving multiple outputs from the source without intermediate steps that could degrade the in-formation content. These advantages will be demonstrated in the experiments section. 

2.3 Hierarchical Clustering on Non-Euclidean Data 

A graph hierarchical clustering algorithm takes as input a graph structure, and outputs a hierarchy of clusters represented in a tree or dendrogram as shown in Fig. 3 (right). Most hierarchical clustering algorithms are bottom-up methods. They start with the trivial clustering where each node itself forms a cluster. At coarser resolution levels, clusters are gradually merged to create larger clusters and eventually produce the trivial cluster that includes all nodes. In the dendrogram, the horizontal axis denotes the nodes and the vertical axis denotes the distance measured between clusters. For example, in Fig. 3, the corresponding node colors represent the cluster assignment obtained at distance 3, where the purple nodes are merged to form a larger cluster due to the shared triangular structures. A variety of distance measures are introduced in the literature, including the minimum, the maximum, the average distance between any pair of nodes between two clusters, and many others. Most hierarchical clustering research focuses on reducing the time complexity. Recently, some algorithms [35], [36] have been shown to obtain linear time complexity with re-spect to the number of nodes, making hierarchical clustering a practically scalable approach to many problems. To the best of our knowledge, hypergraph clustering has only been studied using flat clustering algorithms. Two branches of flat hypergraph clustering are spectral cluster-ing [37], [38], [39] and modularity-based clustering [40], [41], [42]. The essence of spectral clustering is to learn the spectrum of the hypergraph Laplacian, which might group nodes with isomorphic topology together even if they are    

> Fig. 3. A ego-network graph (left) and its hierarchical clustering dendro-gram (right). The node colors correspond to the cluster labels obtained at resolution level 3, where 4clusters (orange, green, red, purple) are formed.

not connected. Therefore, we focus on modularity-based clustering, which aims to maximize the density of links inside clusters compared to links between communities, generating more realistic clusters that capture local commu-nity structures. Different from existing work, we first study hierarchical clustering for hypergraph data, and apply the clustering technique to perform hypergraph pooling operations. 

## 3 PRELIMINARY ON HYPERGRAPHS 

Notation. A hypergraph G is defined as a pair of two sets 

G = ( V, E), where V = {v1, v 2, ..., v N } denotes the set of 

N nodes (or vertices) and E = {e1, e 2, ..., e K } is the set of 

K hyperedges whose elements ek (k = 1 , 2, ..., K ) are non-empty subsets of V. The incidence matrix of a hypergraph 

H ∈ { 0, 1}N ×K can be used to represent the hypergraph topology, where [H]ve = 1 if node v is contained in the hyperedge e and zero otherwise. Apart from the hypergraph structure, there are also features fv ∈ RD associated with each node v ∈ V and features fe ∈ RF for each hyperedge 

e ∈ E , which are used as row vectors to construct the vertex feature matrix FV ∈ RN ×D , and hyperedge feature matrix 

FE ∈ RK×F . The degree of a node d(v) in a hypergraph is defined as the number of hyperedges that include the node. Similarly, the degree of a hyperedge d(e) in a hyper-graph is defined as the number of nodes included by the hyperedge. The degrees are contained in the diagonal node degree matrix DV ∈ RN ×N and hyperedge degree matrix 

DE ∈ RK×K .

Modularity. We use hypergraph modularity to guide our selection of clusters from a hierarchical dendrogram. The idea of modularity is to compare the number of connec-tions within the cluster with its expected value from a null model. Higher modularity indicates more dense connections within clusters, which is considered a desirable clustering assignment. As established in work [40], the node-degree-preserving adjacency matrix Ahyp = H(DE − I)−1HT is proposed to compute hypergraph modularity. The reason for defining the adjacency matrix with a scaling factor 

(d(e) − 1) is to preserve node degrees as in the original hypergraph. The node connections underlying in a null model are denoted as [Phyp ]uv = d(u)d(v) 

> dV

, with dV = P 

> u∈V

d(u) being the sum of node degrees, which computes how likely two nodes u and v were connected if we randomly construct JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 4

edges between them proportional to the degree of nodes. The expression of hypergraph modularity is then given by 

Qhyp (H, S) = 1

dV

X

> uv

([ Ahyp ]uv − [Phyp ]uv )δ(su, s v ), (1) where S ∈ RN ×ncluster is a binary cluster assignment matrix, and su denote the assigned cluster of node u. δ(su, s v ) is an indicator variable, δ(su, s v ) = 1 if nodes u and v are assigned in a same cluster and zero otherwise. If two nodes are in the same cluster and are connected, the difference 

[Ahyp ]uv − [Phyp ]uv will be positive, contributing to higher modularity, and vice versa. Consequently, a higher modu-larity means that there are more connections within clusters and thus fewer connections between clusters as the number of connections is fixed. The notations used in this paper are summarized in Table 1. 

Problem formulation. The goal of hypergraph neural networks is to learn a mapping f : ( G, FV ) → Y ∈ RM ×c,where c denotes the number of label classes. The value of M

can be the number of nodes for the node-level task or just 

1 for the hypergraph-level task. From an encoder-decoder perspective, the HGUN has the following signature: 

(

Enc : ( G, FV ) → (GP , FP 

> V

),

Dec : ( GP , FP 

> V

) → (G, Y), where Y ∈ RM ×c, (2) where the encoder compresses the original hypergraph and node features to a latent space such that the pooled hyper-graph GP has less number of nodes NP < N . Note that the condensed hypergraph GP does not necessarily have fewer hyperedges because the hyperedges in the pooled hy-pergraph are constructed by exploring higher-order connec-tions among nodes (i.e. cliques), which are data dependent. The pooled hypergraph is associated with its pooled node signals FP 

> V

∈ RNP ×h with hidden dimension h. Taking the tuple of (GP , FP 

> V

) as input, the decoder then recovers the original hypergraph G while constructing new output features Y.We define the number of layers in HGUN as the number of HGXConv + PHPool/ PH-UnPool blocks. For example, the HGUN shown in Fig. 1 consists of 3 layers. Note that the hypergraph topologies in HGUN encoder and decoder are identical at the same layer, which acts as a backbone to support the reconstruction of the output features [17], [23]. Allowing for different hypergraph structures in encoder and decoder would transition our model into a genera-tive framework, which is beyond the scope of this paper. For further exploration of models that adapt and refine hypergraph structures within neural networks, we direct interested readers to the work described in [43]. 

## 4 HYPERGRAPH U-N ETS 

We introduce the HyperGraph U-Net (HGUN) architecture, which consists of three major components: Parallel Hierar-chical Pooling (PHPool), Unpooling (PHUnpool), and Hy-perGraph Cross-Convolution (HGXConv). Without losing generality, we present the overall HGUN encoder architec-ture in Fig. 4 as the decoder is constructed by replacing PH-Pool with PHUnpool to enlarge a hypergraph. As shown in Fig. 4, PHPool first uses a hierarchical clustering algorithm that takes a hypergraph as input and outputs a hierarchical dendrogram, capturing coarse-grained structures of hyper-graphs. To obtain reasonable and meaningful cluster as-signments, we greedily select clusters from the dendrogram under the guidance of modularity. These selected cluster assignments are injected into the HGUN encoder to coarsen corresponding hypergraphs. The detailed description of PH-Pool is given in subsection 4.1. The HGXConv, furthermore, aggregates neighboring information by modeling higher-order interactions via cross-node multiplication, which is presented in subsection 4.2. 

4.1 Parallel Hierarchical Pooling (PHPool) 

Consider node-pooling as a node-grouping problem, where each pooling layer maps a hypergraph into a condensed hypergraph with fewer nodes. Let S(l) ∈ { 0, 1}Nl×Nl+1 be a binary cluster assignment matrix that represents the pooling relationship between two consecutive layers, where Nl >Nl+1 . Formally, the pooling procedure can be described as two steps: 

(Cluster Assignments: G → S = {S(1) , ..., S(L)};

Coarsening: (G(l), F(l) 

> V

; S(l+1) ) → (G(l+1) , F(l+1)  

> V

), (3) where l = 0, 1, ..., L and (G(0) , F(0)  

> V

) is the original hy-pergraph and features. The first step takes a hypergraph as input and generates a series of clustering assignment matrices S(l) that map the nodes between two consecutive layers. [S(l)]ij denotes whether the i-th node in the current hypergraph belongs to the j-th cluster, that is, the j-th node in the pooled hypergraph. The coarsening step can be seen as reducing the hypergraph tuple (G(l), F(l) 

> V

) to a condensed hypergraph with fewer nodes. The cluster assignment step is achieved all at once and thus can be separated as a pre-processing step to speed up the training procedure. We describe these two steps in the following subsections.                                   

> TABLE 1 Notation Table
> Symbol Description
> GHypergraph structure GVVertex set of a hypergraph
> EHyperedge set of a hypergraph
> NNumber of nodes in a hypergraph, i.e., |V|
> KNumber of hyperedges in a hypergraph, i.e., |E|
> HHypergraph incidence matrix
> AHypergraph adjacency matrix, HH T
> Ahyp Node-degree-preserving adjacency matrix, H(DE−I)HT
> DVDiagonal node degree matrix
> DEDiagonal hyperedge degree matrix
> dVSum of node degrees
> (·)(l)Variable at the lth layer of hypergraph U-Nets
> FVNode feature matrix
> FEHyperedge feature matrix
> YOutput embedding for downstream tasks
> fvFeature vector associated with node v
> feEmbedding vector for hyperedge e
> SClustering assignment matrix for node pooling
> WLearnable weight matrix in a neural network
> bLearnable bias matrix in a neural network
> σActivation function for a neural network JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 5
> Fig. 4. The overall architecture of the proposed PHPool operator combined with HGXConv to formulate the HGUN Encoder. The clustering assignments of PHPool come from a flattened hierarchical dendrogram and are injected to perform coarsening after each HGXConv layer. The two-stage propagation rule of HGXConv is displayed on the right.
> Fig. 5. (a) Two resulting cluster assignments from the hierarchical dendrogram for a molecule hypergraph. Node colors indicate cluster assignments. (b) Modularities for all unique clustering assignments obtained from the dendrogram.

4.1.1 Cluster Assignments Generation 

As illustrated in Fig. 4 (top), a hypergraph is first fed into the hierarchical algorithm [44], [45] to produce a dendrogram that represents coarse-grained structures of a hypergraph from bottom to top. Among many cluster assignments that can be retrieved from the hierarchical dendrogram, we greedily select the optimal granularity thresholds based on hypergraph modularity and generate a series of cluster assignments. The detailed procedure is described as follows. 

(a) Fit hierarchical dendrogram for hypergraphs. To apply hierarchical clustering to hypergraphs, we first trans-form the hypergraph into a metric space by computing shortest-path distances between all pairs of nodes using Di-jkstra’s algorithm [46]. The resulting distance matrix serves as input to an agglomerative clustering procedure, which iteratively merges nodes and clusters to produce a den-drogram (Fig. 4). This dendrogram compactly represents the nested community structure of the hypergraph across multiple scales. Each horizontal cut of the dendrogram corresponds to a particular resolution of the hypergraph, yielding a clustering assignment of the nodes. By vary-ing the cut threshold, we obtain a family of progressively coarser partitions. These multiresolution clusterings form the basis of our pooling and unpooling operators: finer cuts preserve detailed local structures, while coarser cuts emphasize broader community organization. 

(b) Hypergraph modularity-guided threshold selec-tion. With the agglomerative dendrogram, we then need to choose L cluster assignments, which correspond to L

pooling (or unpooling) layers. A straightforward way to select cluster assignments is by specifying the number of clusters, which is equivalent to defining a pooling ratio. For example, if a pooling ratio is 0.5 for L = 3 layers, the number of nodes will be [N, 0.5N, 0.25 N, 1] . This method works well on large hypergraphs that exhibit dense and wide community structures but could be problematic on JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6

small hypergraphs such as molecules. For example, the molecule in Fig. 5 contains 24 nodes, and its two cluster assignments (#1 and #2) yield 12 and 6 nodes, respectively. Clustering #2 preserves important local bond structures, whereas cluster assignment #1 is overly detailed, resulting in topological distortion and less meaningful structures. To quantify clustering performance and select optimal thresh-olds for a hypergraph, we use hypergraph modularity [40] as the evaluation metric. Hypergraph modularity measures the density of connections within clusters, favoring assign-ments with more connected hyperedges within clusters. As shown in Fig. 5 (b), the curve describes the modularity for all unique cluster assignments obtained from the hierarchical dendrogram. Consistent with expectations, cluster assign-ment #2 demonstrates higher modularity than clustering #1, validating the effectiveness of modularity as a clustering metric for selecting meaningful cluster assignments. Embracing modularity, we propose a greedy algorithm (Algorithm 1) to select the optimal cluster assignments from the constructed hierarchical dendrogram. After evaluating all clustering assignments using modularity, we iteratively select the cluster assignments with the maximum modular-ity until L grouping layers (ie L − 1 cluster assignments) are generated. Note that we only need L − 1 cluster assign-ments for L pooling layers because the last pooling layer is as trivial as clustering all nodes into a single cluster to generate a holistic hypergraph representation. As elaborated in Algorithm 1, it takes input of the incidence matrix H

of a hypergraph, the linkage matrix Z and the number of desired grouping layers L, and produces a list of cluster assignments C∗ representing the optimal granularities for an underlying hypergraph. The algorithm proceeds as follows. The third column of the linkage matrix, denoted by Z[: , 3] , contains the distance measures for all cluster merges. We begin by retrieving the distinct distances T = Z[: , 3] . In the first step, we iterate through these distances, flatten the dendrogram to obtain cluster labels c(t), calculate the corresponding modularity via Eq. (1), and store the results in a list Q. The second stage optimizes the thresholds by selecting those that maximize modularity. Specifically, a greedy approach is employed to first identify the threshold with the highest modularity, then perform a rightward search, ignoring prior modularities. The rightward search is preferred because it constructs hypergraphs from fine-grained to coarse-grained levels, as only this direction produces coarser hypergraphs. Addition-ally, empirical observations, such as the modularity curve in Fig. 5 (right), show that modularity is typically a concave function, with the right side of the peak being smoother than the left. The greedy selection process operates in a loop, termi-nating when either the layer counter l reaches the desired number of layers L or when all distance measures are ex-hausted. In each iteration, the index of the optimal threshold is identified by maximizing the modularities to the right of the current cursor (i.e., idx ∗ ← argmax j≥idx Q[j]). The modularities up to and including this selected index idx ∗

are then set to negative infinity, and the cursor is advanced to idx ∗ + 1 so that the next search continues strictly to the right. The detailed procedure is described in Step 2 of Algorithm 1. 

Algorithm 1 Determine Optimal Thresholds via Modularity Maximization 

Input: The incidence matrix H; The linkage matrix Z repre-senting a dendrogram; the number of layers L;

Output: A list of optimal clusters C∗ for a dendrogram.  

> 1:

Retrieve all unique distance measure T = unique (Z[: 

, 3])  

> 2:

Initialize an empty list Q to hold modularities  

> 3:

// Step 1: Compute modularities  

> 4:

for each threshold t do  

> 5:

Obtain cluster labels c(t) ∈ RN by cutting the dendro-gram Z at threshold t 

> 6:

Q ← Add (Modularity (H, c (t))) according to Eq. (1)  

> 7:

// Step 2: Choose optimal clusters based on modularities  

> 8:

Declare an empty list C∗ for the optimal clusters  

> 9:

Initialize layer counter l = 0  

> 10:

Initialize counter idx = 0 for iterating distance measure  

> 11:

While l < L do  

> 12:

If idx > = length (T ) do  

> 13:

break  

> 14:

Select the optimal threshold index idx ∗ ←

argmax j≥idx Q[j] 

> 15:

Add selected cluster C∗ ← Add (c(T [idx ∗]))  

> 16:

Mute the prior modularities Q[: idx ∗ + 1] ← −∞  

> 17:

Update index idx ← idx ∗ + 1  

> 18:

l = l + 1 

The output cluster assignments C∗ from Algorithm 1 are labeled based on the original hypergraph, where each cluster label in C∗ is a length-N vector, indicating clusters at different resolution levels. To perform sequential coarsening as shown in Fig. 4 (left), mappings between two consecutive layers are needed. We then iteratively examine parent-child relationships among clusters. For each cluster in the l-th layer, we identify its members, check the uniformity of their parental cluster assignments from the previous layer, and record a tuple (parent id, child id) that defines the mapping between consecutive granularity levels. 

4.1.2 Higher-order Relationships Augmented Coarsen 

Note that the tuple (parent id, child id) obtained from PH-Pool above is a sparse representation of the cluster assignment matrix S(l) ∈ RNl×Nl+1 . For consistency, we use notation S(l) to represent the hierarchical mapping between any two consecutive blocks. A new feature matrix and hypergraph structure are then generated by a higher-order relationship augmented coarsening. In particular, for 

l = 0 , 1, ..., L , we apply the following steps 

F(l+1)  

> V

= S(l)T

F(l) 

> V

∈ RNl+1 ×h, N l+1 < N l; (4a) 

A(l+1) = S(l)T

A(l)S(l) ∈ RNl+1 ×Nl+1 ; (4b) 

G(l+1) = FindCliques (A(l+1) ). (4c) Eq. (4a) generates new node embeddings by aggregating current node embeddings in the same cluster. Next, taking the hypergraph adjacency matrix representation, Eq. (4b) connects new nodes (clusters) if their parent nodes are connected in the previous layer, Eq. (4c) further constructs hyperedges using cliques in the coarsened hypergraph adja-JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 7

cency matrix. Eq. (4b) and Eq. (4c) together connect the clus-ters that have connected nodes and raise such connection to hyperedges if a group of nodes are mutually connected. The function FindCliques is implemented using the clique-finding routine [47] in the Python NetworkX library. 

4.2 Hypergraph Cross Convolution (HGXConv) 

In addition to the pooling layer, we propose using a hy-pergraph cross-convolution (HGXConv) operation to en-code higher-order interactions among nodes by cross-node products [13]. The HGXConv is designed under the neural message passing paradigm [27], aggregating neighboring messages to individual nodes. Consequently, we switch to the node-wise and hyperedge-wise notation, in which 

fv ∈ Rh denotes the embedding vector of the node v ∈ V 

and fe ∈ Rh represents the hyperedge embedding vector for any hyperedge e ∈ E .In the l-th layer ( l = 0 , 1, ..., L − 1), let (G(l), F(l) 

> V

) be the hypergraph tuple. Suppose that the hypergraph topology 

G(l) consists of a node set V(l) and a hyperedge set E(l).Denote V (l)(e) = {v ∈ V (l)|v ∈ e} as the set of vertices that are contained in hyperedge e, and E(l)(v) = {e ∈ E (l)|e ∋

v} as the hyperedge set that contains node v, one layer of the HGXConv is composed of three modules: 



Node2Hyperedge : f (l+1)  

> e

= fV→E (f (l) 

> v

, V (l)(e)); 

Hyperedge2Node : f (l+1)   

> N(v)

= fE→V (f (l+1)  

> e

, E (l)(v)); 

Fusion : f (l+1)  

> v

= fcombine (f (l) 

> v

, f (l+1)   

> N(v)

).

(5) The operation Node2Hyperedge aggregates information from individual nodes to their corresponding hyperedges as shown in Fig. 4 (right), generating an intermediate hyper-edge embedding fe, differentiating hypergraph convolution from regular graph convolution [10], [12]. Following this, 

Node2Hyperedge processes these embedded hyperedge rep-resentations back to the nodes that are connected to each hyperedge. The resulting node embedding f (l+1)   

> N(v)

∈ Rh is re-ferred to the neighborhood embedding for node v, because this embedding captures the summarized local connectivity patterns around each node. Considering that neighboring nodes do not necessarily behave similarly to central nodes, it is advantageous to incorporate the original node features again. To address this, we introduce a fusion module that combines the original node features with the embedded neighborhood features from message passing. We describe the three modules of HGXConv using layer-agnostic notation in the following subsections for clarity. However, it is important to note that both the input hyper-graph tuple data and the resulting embeddings differ across layers. 

4.2.1 Node2Hyperedge 

The goal of Node2Hyperedge is to obtain hyperedge embed-dings that capture the mixed (higher-order) effect among the nodes incident to a hyperedge. Inspired by the tensor hypergraph message passing (T-HGMP) [13], we define the 

Node2Hyperedge mapping via element-wise multiplicative mixing. Specifically, consider a hyperedge e with incident node set V (e) = {v1, . . . , v k}, where k = |V (e)| denotes the hyperedge degree. Let fvi ∈ Rh be the feature vector of node 

vi. We first compute a transformed node representation 

avi = σ1(Wv fvi + bv ) ∈ Rh′

, (6) where Wv ∈ Rh′×h and bv ∈ Rh′

are learnable parameters shared across nodes. We then define the node-to-hyperedge aggregation fV→E : Rk×h → Rh′

as the element-wise geometric mean: 

fe = ( av1 ⊙ · · · ⊙ avk )⊙ 1 

> k

, (7) where ⊙ denotes element-wise product and (·)⊙ 1 

> k

denotes the element-wise power. Eq. (7) is permutation invariant with respect to the node order in V (e), and can be viewed as a degree-normalized k-way multiplicative feature mixing operator aiming to capture higher-order node interactions. For implementation, we use σ1(·) = softplus( ·) = log(1 + 

e(·)) to ensure positivity. To improve numerical stability, we compute Eq. (7) in the log-domain: 

fe = exp 1

k

> k

X

> i=1

log( avi )

!

, (8) where log( ·) and exp( ·) are applied element-wise. 

Remark. Eq. (7) can be interpreted as inducing rich cross-node interactions. To build intuition, consider a scalar feature per node and ignore nonlinearities. Then the ag-gregation reduces to (wf v1 + b)( wf v2 + b) · · · (wf vk + b),whose expansion contains not only the pure k-way product 

wk Qki=1 fvi but also many lower-order cross terms due to the bias term. This illustrates that applying an affine transform before multiplicative mixing can capture interac-tion patterns beyond a single fixed order (up to order k), providing a more expressive alternative to purely additive aggregation. 

4.2.2 Hyperedge2Node 

To aggregate hyperedge embeddings back to nodes, we sim-ply define fE→V as a multilayer-perceptron (MLP) followed by summation: 

fN (v) = X

> e∈E(v)

σ3(Wefe + be), (9) where We ∈ Rh′×h and be ∈ Rh′

are trainable parameters in the neural network and ReLU is used for σ3 in practice. 

4.2.3 Fusion 

Inspired by GraphSAGE [48], we propose to combine self node feature and neighborhood embedding and define 

fcombine as: 

f ′ 

> v

= σ4(Wfuse [fv , fN (v)] + bfuse ). (10) The concatenated feature [fv , fN (v)] ∈ R2h is first fed into an MLP with learnable weight matrix Wfuse ∈ Rh×2h and bias matrix b ∈ Rh, and then passed in the ReLU activation function. This concatenation allows the MLP to learn the importance of weights assigned to the self-node feature and the neighborhood feature. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 8

> Fig. 6. Two variations of HGUN: (a) Encoder only for hypergraph-level tasks; (b) Encoder-decoder for node-level tasks.

4.3 Hypergraph U-Net Architecture 

The hypergraph u-net (HGUN) architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1. It consists of an encoder and a decoder to coarsen and expand hypergraphs along with node features. The encoder contains several blocks, each of which is constructed by an HGXConv layer and a PHPool layer. HGXConv aggregates information from the local neighborhood to hyperedges and back to each node, and PHPool is responsible for reducing the size of hypergraphs to consider clustering characteris-tics according to Eq. (4). Note that the cluster assignment generation is determined in a pre-processing step and in-jected into HGUN’s for coarsening as illustrated in Fig. 4 (left). This design deviates from end-to-end training, but the benefit of doing so is to construct modularity-guided pooling operations across layers (i.e., the sum of hypergraph modularity is maximized along a globally constructed den-drogram cut), while sequential processing only solves the problem for layer-wise local optimization. In subsection 6.5, we will show that this pooling design is robust to the number of layers. The proposed HGUN can be used in encoder-only or encoder-decoder formats as shown in Fig. 6. Using only the encoder, we can obtain a hypergraph embedding and perform hypergraph classification tasks (subsection 6.2). On the other hand, attaching a decoder to the condensed embedding can recover the original hypergraph structure and learn to obtain new node features according to the task. Particularly, the HGUN decoder is mirrored to the encoder, except we conduct PH-UnPool by reversing the process in Eq. (4) as follows: 

F(l−1)  

> Vdec

= S(l)F(l) 

> Vdec

∈ RNl−1×h, N l−1 > N l; (11a) 

A(l−1)  

> dec

= S(l)A(l)

> dec

S(l)T

∈ RNl−1×Nl−1 ; (11b) 

G(l−1)  

> dec

= FindClique (A(l−1)  

> dec

), (11c) for l = L, ..., 1. The starting point of the HGUN decoder is the condensed hypergraph structure and node features obtained from encoder, and the eventual output of HGUN decoder is (G, Y) = (G(0) 

> dec

, F(0)  

> Vdec

). This encoder-decoder architecture thus can be used in node signal reconstruction (subsection 6.1) and classification tasks (subsection 6.4). 

## 5 THEORETICAL ANALYSIS 

The proposed hypergraph u-net includes two major compo-nents: the HGXConv layer and the PHPool layer; we the-oretically analyze the computational complexity and show the desired properties of these two components. 

5.1 Computational Complexity Analysis 

Proposition 1. The time complexity of building L-layer PH-Pool operators is O(N 2 + T (K + N + δ2 

> v

C) + LN log N ),where N and K are the total numbers of nodes and hyperedges, T is the number of distinct thresholds in a dendrogram. δv is the maximum node degree, and C is the average number of clusters in the dendrogram, with 

C ≪ N .

Proof. The time complexity of constructing L PHPool operators can be broken into three steps: 1) The construction of the hierarchical clustering dendro-gram takes O(N 2) using the nearest-neighbor chain algorithm [45]. 2) To select the optimal thresholds from the dendrogram, we need to examine T thresholds, and computing the modularity at a particular threshold takes O(K + N +

δ2 

> v

C), where δv denotes the maximum degree of nodes and C is the average number of clusters. Overall, the modularity-based selection takes O(T (K + N + δ2 

> v

C)) 

time. 3) To determine consecutive layer-to-layer mappings, for every two connected layers, we examine each cluster by finding common parents of the nodes in two layers, the step of searching for common-clustered parents requires O(N log N ), so overall O(LN log N ).Hence, we obtain the total complexity: O(N 2 + T (K +

N + δ2 

> v

C) + LN log N ). □

Remark. The most time-consuming part of constructing L

PHPool layers is the construction of the dendrogram that takes O(N 2). The three terms map to the PHPool stages in Section 4.1: O(N 2) for shortest-path distances and agglom-erative dendrogram construction; O(T (K + N + δ2 

> v

C)) for modularity-guided threshold selection; and O(LN log N )

for the parent–child mapping underlying clique-based hy-peredge reconstruction (and its PHUnpool counterpart). This pipeline runs once as preprocessing, so it does not affect per-epoch training speed; the runtime in Table 5 is measured after PHPool assignments are precomputed. The 

O(N 2) bottleneck can be further mitigated by approximate hierarchical clustering ( O(N log N )) [49], [50], [51] or dis-tributed schemes ( O(|E| N )) [52]. 

Proposition 2. The time complexity of the proposed HGX-Conv for each layer is O(Kδ eh + Kh 2 + N δ v h + N h 2),where N and K are the number of nodes and hyper-edges, respectively. δv and δe are the maximum node degree and hyperedge degree. h denotes the feature dimension. 

Proof. The first two terms in the expression correspond to the complexity of node-to-hyperedge propagation, where 

Kδ eh is the complexity for aggregating node features, Kh 2

is complexity for transforming node features using MLP. Similarly, the last two terms represent the complexity for hyperedge-to-node propagation. In addition, the fusion step takes O(2 N h 2), so the overall time complexity for each HGXConv layer is O(Kδ eh + Kh 2 + N δ v h + N h 2). □JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 9

5.2 Permutation Equivariance 

In hypergraph representation learning, an important prop-erty is to ensure permutation equivariant or invariant. We show that PHPool is permutation equivariant. Permutation equivariant means that if the nodes of the graph are per-muted, the corresponding output of the model should reflect that permutation in a consistent way. 

Definition 1. Permutation Equivariance for Hypergraphs .

Given a permutation function π : V → V such that, for any node vi, i ∈ { 1, 2, ..., N }, there exists exactly one index j such that π(j) = i. Let G be any hypergraph with node feature matrix F, a function f : ( G, F) → y is permutation equivariant iff f (π(G), π (F)) = π(f (G, F)) .

Proposition 3. The HGUN is permutation equivariant. 

Proof. For PHPool layers, the cluster assignment matrix 

S generation is permutation equivariant because the hierar-chical dendrogram will permute consistently if node order changes. Furthermore, from Eq. (4), we can see that hyper-graph permutation does not alter the pooled hypergraph features; it only changes the order in which the features are computed. Regarding HGXConv layers, the two-stage propagations fV→E in Eq. (7) and fE→V in Eq. (9) are permutation invariant because they are functions operated on an incident node sets and hyperedge sets. Since the fusion step in Eq. (10) requires node features as input, it is permutation equivariant, which makes the overall HGX-Conv layer permutation equivariant. Overall, the HGUN is permutation equivariant. □

5.3 Expressive power of hypergraph pooling operators 

The expressive power of pooling operations is defined as the capability of retaining the same expressive power as the message-passing layers before it [53]. We show the PHPool layer satisfies three sufficient (not necessary) conditions for examining the expressive power of hypergraph pooling operators. The theorem is as follows 

Theorem 1. Let G1 = (V1, E1) with |V 1| = N1 and 

G2 = ( V2, E2) with |V 2| = N2 be two nonisomorphic hypergraphs. Suppose after applying a block of sev-eral message-passing layers, the two hypergraphs are 

Gmp  

> 1

and Gmp  

> 2

with node features Fmp  

> 1

∈ RN1×D and 

Fmp  

> 2

∈ RN2×D . For a given pooling operator POOL , let 

Gpool  

> 1

= POOL (Gmp  

> 1

) and Gpool  

> 2

= POOL (Gmp  

> 2

) have the same number of nodes |V pool  

> 1

| = |V pool  

> 2

| = N . The proposed HGXConv layer and the PHPool layer satisfy the following three conditions: 1) PN1 

> i

f mp i̸ = PN2 

> j

f mp j

2) The cluster assignment matrix S by POOL satisfies 

PNj=1 sij = λ, and λ > 0, ∀i.3) The coarsened node feature Fpool is a cluster-wise ag-gregation of the unpooled node feature Fmp ,such that the pooling operator POOL will produce differ-ent node features Fpool  

> 1

∈ RN ×D and Fpool  

> 2

∈ RN ×D for any row permutations. Condition 1 is a constraint on the message-passing layers before a pooling layer; it requires that the message-passing layers have discriminative power to obtain different sums of node embeddings for two non-isomorphic hypergraphs. Condition 2 requires all nodes in the original hypergraph must contribute to the construction of new supernodes, and the contributions for all nodes are on the same scale. Condi-tion 3 further requires the supernode features to be a cluster-wise aggregation (i.e., a linear combination determined by the cluster assignment matrix) of original node features. 

Proof. For Condition 1, the hypergraph isomorphism computation [15] shows that the key requirement for mes-sage passing to be expressive is to ensure message passing is injective. The node-to-hyperedge aggregation function 

fV→E , which computes the element-wise product of the node features, is unfortunately not injective. The hyperedge-to-node summation function fE→V , on the other hand, is shown to be injective. The fusion step in Eq. (10) preserves the self-feature alongside the neighborhood embedding, which mitigates the non-injectivity of the multiplicative node-to-hyperedge aggregation in Eq. (7) and improves discriminative capacity in practice. PHPool assigns each node in the original hypergraph to exactly one cluster, satisfying condition 2: PNj=1 sij = 1 , ∀i.Furthermore, since our feature coarsening is expressed as 

Fpool = ST Fmp , Fpool is a cluster-wise aggregation (a sum of features over members of each cluster) of the unpooled node feature Fmp , satisfying Condition 3. □

5.4 Information Loss Comparison Between Sequential and Parallel Pooling 

Here we present the proposition that shows parallel pooling has less information loss than sequential pooling under matched first-level coarsening. This result formalizes one mechanism by which parallel pooling can reduce cumu-lative information loss relative to sequential pooling, but it should not be read as an unconditional guarantee for arbitrary parallel and sequential pooling maps. 

Proposition 4. Let A denote the original hypergraph. As-sume the first-level pooled representation is matched in the sequential and parallel constructions, i.e., Bseq =

Bpar = B, or more generally that I(A; Bpar ) =

I(A; Bseq ). Consider (i) sequential pooling , which pro-duces Cseq from B so that A → B → Cseq , and (ii) 

parallel pooling , which produces Cpar directly from A

(with internal randomness independent of B conditional on A). Define the information loss in the pooling procedure as 

InfoLoss( A, B, C ) := H(A)−I(A; B, C ), where H(A) is the entropy of the original hypergraph A, I(A; B, C ) is the mutual information between A and the two pooled hypergraph B, C . Under the matched first-level coars-ening assumption above, the information loss in par-allel pooling is at most that in sequential pooling, i.e., 

InfoLoss( A, B, C par ) ≤ InfoLoss( A, B, C seq ).

Proof. Denote Bseq = Bpar = B. The pair (A, B seq , C seq )

forms a Markov chain A → Bseq → Cseq , hence I(A; Cseq |

Bseq ) = 0 . Applying the chain rule I(A; B, C ) = I(A; B) + 

I(A; C | B) gives 

Iseq := I(A; Bseq , C seq ) = I(A; Bseq ). (12) JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 10 

For the parallel architecture no conditional independence holds, so 

Ipar := I(A; Bpar , C par ) = I(A; Bpar ) + I A; Cpar | Bpar 

.

(13) Because the first pooling map is determined by the original hypergraph A in both parallel and sequential pooling, we have I(A; Bpar ) = I(A; Bseq ). Subtracting (12) from (13) yields 

Ipar − Iseq = I A; Cpar | Bpar 

 ≥ 0.

Finally, we obtain InfoLoss par = H(A) − Ipar ≤ H(A) −

Iseq = InfoLoss seq . □

## 6 EXPERIMENTS 

In this section, we conduct comprehensive experiments to assess the performance of our proposed model, which includes hypergraph reconstruction, hypergraph classifica-tion, and node classification. The experimental results are presented and discussed. 

6.1 Hypergraph Reconstruction on Synthetic Networks 

Recall that one of the most important goals in node pool-ing methods is to preserve as much network structure as possible. As a result, before presenting the experiments in real-world datasets, we first design an experiment on syn-thetic networks to examine the compression-and-recovery capability of HGUN. 

Data generation. We generate four hypernetworks: ring, grid, pyramid, and community, and let the coordinate of each node be the node feature matrix F ∈ RN ×2. The ring network contains 200 nodes and 200 hyperedges, where each hyperedge is constructed by a node and the left and right neighbors, so the network is a 3-uniform hypergraph. The grid network is constructed by 30 × 30 nodes. Similar to the ring network, each hyperedge in the grid network is a small square that contains a node and the right, bottom, and bottom-right neighbors. The pyramid network has 210 

nodes and each hyperedge is a 3-point triangle. These three synthetic hypergraphs all have uniform structures, in which cluster behavior is rare. So we further generate a community network to simulate more realistic network structures. 

Experiment setup. The learning objective is to mini-mize the mean squared error (MSE) between the input coordinates and recovered coordinates. To perform a fair comparison, we use identical u-net architectures and hy-perparameters. Following prior work [31], each u-net has one block of HGXConv + PHPool/ PH-UnPool, and an additional convolution layer at the end. The reason for having an additional convolutional layer is to use it as the final prediction projector. We selected two representative baselines: TopKPool [17] from node dropping and MinCut-Pool [31] from node clustering. Regarding hyperparameters, we set the pooling ratio of all models to 25% , the learning rate to 0.005 , and the hidden dimension to 32 . We train each model for up to 10 , 000 epochs and conduct early stopping with patience of 1000 epochs. For the two graph autoencoders used for TopKPool and MinCutPool, we use GCN [26] as convolution layers. To control factors other than the pooling approach, we use HGNN [8] as convolution layers for HGUN rather than the proposed HGXConv. This is because HGNN performs a clique expansion to hyper-graphs and adapts GCN to the reduced hypergraph, which is computing the same message passing as GCN. 

> Fig. 7. Signal reconstructions on ring, grid, pyramid, and community networks with different pooling methods.

Reconstruction results and discussion Fig. 7 presents the original network signals F and the reconstructed signals 

Frec using graph or hypergraph autoencoders. On all of the networks, PHPool consistently outperforms the other two benchmarks. We first observe the reconstruction results for TopKPool suffers from the most severe structural damage on all of these networks. On the ring, grid, and pyramid datasets, partial structures are retained, but for commu-nity networks that are common structures in real-world dataset, TopKPool generates random coordinates that make no sense. This is not surprising because discarding nodes could cause sparse neighboring aggregation and harm the eventual coordinate prediction. With respect to MinCutPool, we can see that it has improved upon TopKPool in the sense that it retains the basic shape of the original topology. However, we can see that on the boundaries of the grid and the pyramid network, MinCutPool still suffers from local structural distortion. What’s more, as a node-cluster pooing method, MinCutPool widely spreads the node locations, adding more noise to the node coordinates especially those between clusters in the community network. Imaging if k-means clustering is applied based on the node coordinates, then there will be more nodes that lie on the border that are hard to cluster. This validates the assumption that sequen-tially generating pooling operators lead to a larger informa-tion loss during data processing. The superior performance of PHPool demonstrates the effectiveness of our parallel-pooling design, suggesting the original network structure is well preserved in the embedding space. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 11 

TABLE 2 Average testing accuracy ( %, ± standard deviation) on 9 real-world datasets for hypergraph classification. The best results are highlighted for each dataset.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

> Social Network Bioinformatics IMDB-BINARY IMDB-MULTI COLLAB MUTAG PROTEINS D&D NCI1 # Graphs 1,000 1,500 5,000 188 1,113 1,178 4,110 # Classes 2332222Avg. # Nodes 19.8 13.0 74.5 17.9 39.1 284.3 29.8 Conv. Networks
> GCN 73 .26 ±0.46 50 .39 ±0.41 80 .59 ±0.27 69 .50 ±1.78 73 .24 ±0.73 72 .05 ±0.55 76 .29 ±1.79
> HGNN 72 .78 ±0.86 48 .13 ±1.36 78 .19 ±0.63 71 .29 ±1.38 71 .46 ±1.66 73 .79 ±1.17 75 .00 ±1.40
> HGAT 74 .02 ±0.32 50 .87 ±0.62 81 .44 ±0.37 74 .53 ±0.98 71 .52 ±0.74 73 .98 ±0.57 76 .58 ±0.85
> HNHN 67 .43 ±0.79 50 .93 ±0.83 79 .67 ±0.42 73 .88 ±1.74 72 .13 ±1.24 73 .58 ±1.26 75 .27 ±1.05
> HGXConv 73 .34 ±0.65 50 .76 ±0.83 81 .24 ±0.43 73 .37 ±1.09 73 .92 ±0.98 73 .67 ±0.88 76 .05 ±0.73
> Graph Pooling w. Default Backbones ASAP+GCN 72 .81 ±0.50 50 .78 ±0.75 78 .64 ±0.50 77 .83 ±1.49 73 .92 ±0.63 76 .58 ±1.04 71 .48 ±0.42
> SAGPool+GCN 72 .55 ±1.28 50 .23 ±0.44 78 .03 ±0.31 73 .67 ±4.28 71 .56 ±1.49 74 .72 ±0.82 67 .45 ±1.11
> TopKPool+GCN 71 .58 ±0.95 48 .59 ±0.72 77 .58 ±0.85 67 .61 ±3.36 70 .48 ±1.01 73 .63 ±0.55 67 .02 ±2.25
> DiffPool+GraphSage 73 .14 ±0.70 51 .31 ±0.72 78 .68 ±0.43 79 .22 ±1.02 73 .03 ±1.00 77 .56 ±0.41 62 .32 ±1.90
> MinCutPool+GCN 72 .65 ±0.75 51 .04 ±0.70 80 .87 ±0.34 79 .17 ±1.64 74 .72 ±0.48 78 .22 ±0.67 74 .25 ±0.86
> SEPool+GCN 74 .12 ±0.56 51 .53 ±0.65 81 .28 ±0.15 85 .56 ±1.09 76 .42 ±0.39 77 .98 ±0.57 78 .35 ±0.33
> Graph pooling w. HGXConv ASAP+HGXConv 73 .66 ±0.43 51 .27 ±0.63 79 .31 ±0.48 79 .83 ±1.77 74 .55 ±0.77 76 .93 ±0.62 72 .81 ±1.03
> TopKPool+HGXConv 72 .31 ±0.44 50 .83 ±0.98 68 .55 ±0.50 69 .88 ±1.98 71 .56 ±0.83 75 .66 ±0.73 68 .23 ±1.11
> SEPool+HGXConv 74 .31 ±0.53 51 .73 ±0.71 80 .73 ±0.44 85 .02 ±1.33 77 .31 ±0.44 76 .93 ±0.56 78 .88 ±0.98
> PHPool w. Conv. Networks PHPool+HGNN 74 .88 ±0.59 53 .21 ±0.77 81 .98 ±0.49 85 .33 ±1.54 73 .88 ±0.59 77 .93 ±0.64 79 .93 ±1.41
> PHPool+HGAT 75 .36 ±0.36 53 .78 ±0.69 82 .33 ±0.44 86 .73 ±1.39 78 .33 ±0.48 77 .43 ±0.58 81 .23 ±0.94
> PHPool+HNHN 72 .67 ±0.53 52 .81 ±0.73 81 .04 ±0.52 84 .83 ±1.60 74 .32 ±0.54 74 .58 ±0.55 80 .02 ±0.96
> HGUN(Enc) PHPool+HGXConv 76 .53 ±0.48 55 .31 ±0.61 83 .26 ±0.53 86 .42 ±1.65 78 .06 ±0.56 79 .88 ±0.54 81 .89 ±1.03

6.2 Hypergraph Classification 

Hypergraph classification aims to predict the label associ-ated with an entire hypergraph. Applications of hypergraph classification include social network classification (e.g., type of an ego-network), molecule classification (e.g., mutage-netic or not), etc. Datasets for hypergraph classification usually contain many small-sized hypergraphs and can be easily trained in batches. 

Dataset. We select seven datasets from TU datasets [54] for hypergraph classification, they include: 

Social network dataset. IMDB-BINARY and IMDB-MULTI are datasets that revolve around movie collaborations. Each dataset represents movies as graphs where vertices corre-spond to actors/actresses. An edge is established between two actors/actresses if they appear together in another film. IMDB-BINARY focuses on movies from two genres—Action and Romance—while IMDB-MULTI includes an additional genre, Sci-Fi, alongside Comedy and Romance, making it a multiclass dataset. Similarly, the COLLAB dataset is a collaboration dataset in scientific domains. Each hypergraph in this dataset represents the ego network of a researcher, with edges denoting collaboration between two researchers. Each researcher’s ego network is classified into one of three possible fields: High Energy Physics, Condensed Matter Physics, or Astro Physics, reflecting the specific area of physics to which the researcher is affiliated. 

Biochemical dataset. The MUTAG dataset includes datasets of mutagenic aromatic and heteroaromatic nitro compounds and the goal is to predict their mutagenicity. The PROTEINS dataset, on the other hand, contains nodes that represent secondary structure elements (SSEs) of proteins. Connec-tions between nodes signify neighboring elements in the amino acid sequence or three-dimensional space. The task of the PROTEINS dataset is to classify a network as one of the three types: helix, sheet, and turn. The D&D dataset consists of graphs that depict protein structures, where each node represents an amino acid. Edges between nodes are established if the distance between two amino acids is less than 6 angstroms. Each protein in the dataset is labeled as either an enzyme or a non-enzyme, indicating its functional category. NCI1 is a dataset collected by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and contains chemical compounds for anti-cancer screens where the task is to classify chemicals as positive or negative to cell lung cancer. 

Conversion of graphs to hypergraphs. The initial datasets are structured as graphs, representing network structures. While there are studies that learn hypergraph topology from node features [55], [56], node features are not always available in datasets. As a result, we choose to simply ele-vate graph structures to hypergraphs by identifying higher-order relationships within them. In the three social network datasets, hyperedges are formulated for groups of nodes that are mutually connected (i.e., forming cliques). For the four biochemical datasets, the significance of ring struc-tures in molecules for identifying their properties has been highlighted in previous studies [57], [58] Consequently, we construct hyperedges based on these ring structures in the biochemical datasets. 

Baselines. Without pooling layers, a hypergraph convo-lutional neural network can only learn node embeddings, and a common practice to make hypergraph-level predic-tions is to summarize the node embeddings through a sum or average readout function at the end of the neural network. We include four convolutional hypergraph neural networks: HGNN [8], HNHN [10], HGAT. [59] and the proposed HGXConv as our baselines. Since these datasets are initially constructed as simple graphs, we also include a simple graph neural network (GCN [26]). We refer to these (hyper)graph convolutional neural networks as backbone models because they are widely used in autoencoder archi-JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 12 

tectures. To validate PHPool, we then consider three node-drop pooling methods as well as three node-cluster pooling methods. 

Node-drop pooling methods.  

> •

TopKPool [17] selects nodes according to an importance score learned by the product of the node features and a trainable projection vector.  

> •

SAGPool [29] replaces the projection vector with an out-put of a self-attention message-passing layer, aiming to take into account the graph structure during score learn-ing.  

> •

ASAP [22] considers a fixed radius of each node as a cluster and learns a score function to sample a subset of each node neighborhood through local convolution. Though it makes use of the cluster assignment idea when learning the score function, it still falls into the node-drop pooling category because it discards nodes with lower scores. 

Node-cluster pooling methods.  

> •

DiffPool [14] employs graph neural networks to learn a cluster assignment matrix, supplemented by an auxiliary link prediction loss to encourage the formation of clusters on neighboring nodes.  

> •

MinCutPool [31] relaxes the learning objective of spectral clustering and includes it in the loss function. The cluster assignment is learned by multi-layer perceptrons.  

> •

SEPool [23] constructs coding trees for graphs by min-imizing structural entropy at specific depth levels, any two consecutive layers of the coding tree define a cluster assignment mapping. 

Experiment setup. We follow previous work [23], [31] and evaluate our model performance with a 10-fold cross-validation. Based on the training/testing split provided by [60], we hold 10% of the training data as a validation set to select the best model hyperparameters. Specifically, the number of depth for all models are set to 3, and the pooling ratio is 25% for the models that require a pooling ratio. The hidden dimension is tuned among {32 , 64 , 128 , 256 }, the batch size is selected from {16 , 64 , 128 }, and the dropout rate is 0 or 0.5. The neural network is optimized with an Adam optimizer, with a learning rate 5 × 10 −4 and weight decay 1 × 10 −4. An early stopping mechanism is used to avoid overfitting, if the model performance does not approve on the validation set for 100 consecutive epochs, we terminate the training procedure. For each fold of the dataset, we repeat the experiment 10 times with different seeds, so overall a total of 100 experiments are run on a dataset. 

Results and discussion. 

Table 2 summarizes the hypergraph classification results on social network and bioinformatics datasets. Overall, HGUN(Enc) (i.e., PHPool+HGXConv) exhibits consistently strong performance across benchmarks and ranks first on 5 out of 7 datasets. On the two bioinformatics datasets MUTAG and PROTEINS, the top-performing model is PH-Pool+HGAT (86.73 on MUTAG and 78.33 on PROTEINS), while HGUN(Enc) remains a close second (85.42 on MUTAG and 78.06 on PROTEINS). This gap suggests that these two molecular datasets may benefit from more expressive and fine-grained interaction weighting, where attention mechanisms can better adaptively emphasize informative node and hyperedge relations (e.g., different bond types or functional groups). Importantly, even without attention, PHPool+HGXConv remains comparable to PHPool+HGAT, indicating that (i) PHPool effectively captures global hierar-chical representations at multiple scales, and (ii) the multi-plicative higher-order mixing in HGXConv can still provide competitive expressiveness when coupled with hierarchical pooling. A key takeaway from Table 2 is that PHPool consistently unlocks global, multi-resolution structure information and improves performance across different hypergraph convo-lution backbones. Comparing each convolution network against its PHPool counterpart shows that PHPool provides substantial gains, particularly on bioinformatics datasets. For example, HGAT alone achieves 74.53 on MUTAG, whereas PHPool+HGAT improves it to 86.73, demonstrat-ing the effectiveness of PHPool in extracting task-relevant hierarchical structure beyond what a flat convolution can capture. Similar improvements are observed for other con-volution backbones, reinforcing that the benefits of PHPool are not tied to a specific convolution design but rather stem from modularity-guided parallel hierarchical coarsening. We further validate the advantage of PHPool by control-ling the convolution backbone in pooling baselines. When equipping other SOTA pooling methods with HGXConv (e.g., ASAP/TopK/SEPool+HGXConv), PHPool+HGXConv achieves the best performance among these HGXConv-based pooling variants, supporting the superiority of PH-Pool as a hypergraph pooling operator. Finally, while HGX-Conv itself is not always the strongest standalone hy-pergraph convolution, combining HGXConv with PHPool yields the best overall performance on most benchmarks. This supports our positioning that PHPool contributes the most significant gains in the HGUN architecture, while HGXConv provides an additional, complementary induc-tive bias for modeling higher-order interactions through multiplicative mixing. 

6.3 Depth Sensitivity for Hypergraph Classification 

We examine pooling depth effects across COLLAB and D&D. We choose COLLAB because it contains the largest number of graphs and D&D because it has the largest average number of nodes. Fig. 8 shows optimal performance at depth 3 for all methods. Beyond this depth, COLLAB exhibits sharp degradation at depth 5, likely from over-compression of dense community structures, while D&D de-grades more gradually, suggesting hierarchical abstraction benefits larger, sparser graphs. Critically, TopK’s node-drop strategy collapses on D&D at depth 4, dropping 11 points. We suspect this could be due to cascading selection errors where irreversible node dropping compounds information loss. In contrast, node-clustering methods (HGUN, MinCut) maintain stability through soft aggregation. 

6.4 Anomaly Detection with Hypergraph U-Nets 

Dataset. Introduced in [61], the Yelp and Amazon datasets have been widely used to evaluate node anomaly detec-tion. The Yelp dataset treats hotel and restaurant reviews as nodes, and the task is to identify spam and legitimate JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 13                                                                                                                                               

> TABLE 3 Experiment results for node anomaly detection. The best average metrics are highlighted for each dataset.
> Dataset Yelp Amazon Model Metric Precision GMean F1-macro Recall Precision GMean F1-macro Recall GNNs GCN 0.3155 0.4946 0.3667 0.7753 0.6793 0.7372 0.5643 0.8000 GAT 0.4542 0.5313 0.4277 0.6215 0.8619 0.8304 0.7146 0.8000 GPRGNN 0.6489 0.6984 0.5734 0.7516 0.8461 0.8232 0.6415 0.8009 FAGCN 0.7108 0.7086 0.6111 0.7064 0.8757 0.8433 0.7330 0.8121 AD GNNs CARE-GNN 0.6943 0.7086 0.6040 0.7232 0.8813 0.8171 0.7245 0.7576 RioGNN 0.6882 0.7352 0.6161 0.7854 0.8609 0.8204 0.7262 0.7818 H²-FDetector 0.7877 0.8164 0.7078 0.8461 0.8652 0.8429 0.7236 0.8394
> BWGNN 0.8128 0.8192 0.7232 0.8256 0.8541 0.8467 0.7163 0.8212
> Graph U-Nets TopK + GCN 0.7033 0.7335 0.7133 0.6779 0.8226 0.8180 0.7023 0.7697 MinCut + GCN 0.8372 0.7623 0.7281 0.6941 0.8136 0.8276 0.7244 0.7606 HyperGNNs HGNN 0.4173 0.5650 0.3421 0.7650 0.7531 0.7704 0.6025 0.7880 HNHN 0.6573 0.6395 0.6528 0.6221 0.8024 0.8101 0.7129 0.8179 HGAT 0.4093 0.4751 0.4698 0.5515 0.7459 0.7688 0.6933 0.7922 HGXConv 0.6863 0.7237 0.7227 0.7632 0.8372 0.8291 0.7090 0.8211 HyperGraph U-Net HGUN 0.8523 0.8272 0.7732 0.8026 0.8867 0.8532 0.7683 0.8210
> Fig. 8. Classification accuracy w.r.t depths on COLLAB and D&D datasets for hypergraph classification. Comparison between HGUN en-coder and 2 graph pooling methods.

reviews. It is a labeled dataset and the labels are retrieved from Yelp’s filtering system. Each node has 32 handcrafted features. The Yelp dataset contains three relationships: 1) R-U-R connects reviews posted by the same user, 2) R-S-R connects reviews under the same product with the same star rating, 3) R-T-R connects reviews under the same product posted in the same month. The Amazon dataset includes users who have posted product reviews. A user is labeled as benign if he/she obtains more than 80% helpful votes, and is labeled as fraudulent if there are less than 20% helpful votes. One of the node features for the Amazon dataset is the minimum number of unhelpful votes, which introduces data leakage to predict anomaly users. As a result, we deleted this feature during data processing and the resulting 24 -dimensional node features. The Amazon dataset has three relations: 1) U-P-U connects users reviewing at least one same product; 2) U-S-V connects users having at least one same star rating within one week; 3) U-V-U connects users with the top 5% 

mutual review text similarities. In our implementation, we combine these three relationships for each dataset and treat them as homogeneous networks. 

Baselines. We choose 4 types of baselines to compare with our model: classic GNNs, GNNs specifically developed for anomaly detection, graph u-nets, and HyperGNNs. 

GNNs : GCN [26] and GAT [62] are popular GNNs for ho-mophilic graphs. GPR-GNN [63] and FAGCN [64] are GNNs optimized for heterophilic graphs. GPR-GNN combines                  

> TABLE 4 Summary Statistics of Anomaly Node Detection Datasets
> V%anomaly |E| Feat Sim Label Sim Yelp 45 ,954 14 .53,846,979 0.77 0.07
> Amazon 11 ,944 9.54,398,392 0.65 0.05

an adaptive generalized PageRank scheme with GNNs. FAGCN adaptively changes the proportion of low- and high-frequency signals with a self-gating mechanism. 

GNNs-based Fraud Detection: CARE-GNN [61] and Ri-oGNN [65] are multi-relation GNNs designed for fraud de-tection that sample and aggregate features of similar neigh-bors. H 2-FDetector [66] is a multi-relation GNN model that considers both homophilic and heterophilic connections. BWGNN [67] proposes Beta Wavelet GNN for anomaly detection on multi-relation graphs. 

Experiment setup. Our main PHPool setting (used in the hypergraph-classification experiments of Section 6.2) selects layer-wise cluster assignments by modularity-guided thresholds and therefore does not require a manually spec-ified pooling ratio. For the large-scale anomaly-detection benchmarks here, however, we adopt a simplified PHPool variant as a scalable approximation: instead of evaluating thresholds on the dendrogram and performing greedy se-lection, we set a fixed pooling ratio of 50% , reducing the number of nodes by half at each layer. This choice is based on the observation that, on hypergraphs of the size of Yelp and Amazon, modularity-refined threshold selection has minimal impact on cluster quality and downstream performance, while uniform halving substantially reduces preprocessing cost. Using the same split introduced by [61], we ran each experiment with different seeds for 10 times and reported the average metrics. The baseline GNNs are implemented using the best hyperparameters from the original papers. The graph u-nets with TopKPooling [17], and MinCutPooling [31] are implemented with GCN as backbone models. To make a fair comparison, the depths of the graph u-nets and hyper-JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 14 

graph u-nets are set to 3, which means that there are two pooling layers and two corresponding unpooling layers. For hyperparameters, the hidden dimension is tuned among 

{32 , 64 , 128 , 256 }, and the dropout rate is either 0 or 0.5.The neural network is optimized with an Adam optimizer, with a learning rate 0.01 for Yelp and 0.001 for Amazon. The weight decay rate is 5 × 10 −5 for both datasets. 

Results and Discussion. The results for node anomaly detection are presented in Table 3. HGUN outperforms other methods on the highly imbalanced Yelp and Amazon datasets in terms of precision, weighted F1-macro, and the geometric mean of recall and precision. This indicates that the node embeddings generated by HGUN, enhanced with pooling and unpooling operations, capture more discrim-inative node features. A possible reason is that varying the size of the hypergraph helps mitigate the problem of oversmoothing [68] by expanding the receptive fields. However, HGUN slightly underperforms GNNs specifically designed for anomaly detection in terms of recall. This is expected, as anomaly-based GNNs often utilize additional information, such as node label heterogeneity, which is crucial for identifying anomalous nodes. It should also be noted that both HGXConv and PHPool leverage local node similarities. The lower recall suggests that HGUN may miss some true anomalies, likely due to the model’s focus on capturing grouping structures within hypergraphs. 

6.5 Depth Sensitivity for Node Anomaly Detection 

We analyze the effect of pooling layer depth on model performance. As illustrated in Fig. 9, optimal performance occurs at moderate depths: depth 4 for Yelp (HGUN F1=0.7862) and depth 3 for Amazon (HGUN F1=0.7683). Beyond these points, all models experience performance degradation, with depth 6 causing significant drops across both datasets. This pattern suggests that while hierarchical pooling captures multi-scale graph structures effectively at moderate depths (3-4 layers), excessive depth leads to over-compression and loss of discriminative local structure. HGUN demonstrates superior depth robustness compared to MinCut and TopK, maintaining stable performance across depths 3-5. TopK exhibits the most severe degradation (Yelp: 

0.730 → 0.687 from depth 2 to 6), indicating limited capac-ity for deep hierarchical learning. These results emphasize the critical role of depth selection in graph pooling architec-tures. 

> Fig. 9. F1 scores w.r.t depths on Yelp and Amazon datasets for node classification. Comparison between (hyper)graph autoencoders with various pooling.

6.6 Runtime Comparison 

In addition to performance gains, hypergraph pooling offers computational efficiency benefits. Table 5 compares wall-clock runtime between HGUN and HGXConv on node anomaly detection. For fair comparison, HGXConv uses 6 convolutional layers to match HGUN’s depth (3 PHPool + HGXConv blocks and 3 PHUnPool + HGXConv layers). HGUN achieves speedups of 13.13% on Yelp and 18.82% on Amazon. This efficiency stems from progressive graph coarsening, which reduces nodes and hyperedges in inter-mediate layers, lowering computational costs.          

> TABLE 5 Wall-clock runtime per epoch (seconds) on node anomaly detection with matched depth. HGXConv uses no pooling; preprocessing time for PHPool is excluded.
> Dataset HGUN HGXConv Speedup (%) Yelp 20.37 23.45 13.13% Amazon 6.73 8.29 18.82%

## 7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 

In this work, we propose a new hypergraph neural net-work architecture: HGUN for node- and hypergraph-level tasks. The basic building blocks in the HGUN consist of hierarchical hypergraph pooling (PHPool) and hyper-graph cross-convolution (HGXConv). The PHPool is for-mulated by greedily selecting clusters that produce the maximum modularity in a hierarchical dendrogram, con-structing modularity-guided pooling layers that are robust to the number of layers. The HGXConv leverages cross-node multiplicative interactions and generalizes it to anode-hyperedge-node propagation scheme. Theoretically, we prove that the proposed PHPool at least retains the same expressiveness of the preceding convolution layers. Through experiments, we observe that HGUN achieves consistently competitive performance in hypergraph recon-struction, hypergraph classification, and node anomaly de-tection. In addition, we find that HGXConv achieves bet-ter performance than the other two-stage message-passing HyperGNNs, and the PHPool further promotes the expres-siveness of the overall neural network. HGUN shows its potential to improve other hypergraph neural networks by investigating the autoencoder architecture. 

Limitations. While HGUN demonstrates strong perfor-mance across diverse tasks, we note several aspects for future improvement. Our current approach employs hard clustering assignments determined in a preprocessing step, which ensures global optimization and computational ef-ficiency but does not adapt to task-specific node features during training. Additionally, the O(N 2) dendrogram con-struction can be expensive for very large hypergraphs, though approximation algorithms [49], [50] and distributed methods [52] can mitigate this cost. Finally, hypergraphs with overlapping community structures or unusual topol-ogy may benefit from soft clustering or alternative quality metrics beyond modularity. Interesting future work includes: 1) Learning soft, hierarchy-aware cluster assignments that explicitly incorpo-rate node features when forming clusters. 2) Reducing the 

O(N 2) computational cost of dendrogram construction by replacing precomputed clustering with trainable clustering JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 15 

assignment matrices optimized end-to-end under a global hierarchical objective. 

## REFERENCES 

[1] Y. Gao, Y. Feng, S. Ji, and R. Ji, “Hgnn+: General hypergraph neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 3181–3199, 2022. [2] M. T. Schaub, Y. Zhu, J.-B. Seby, T. M. Roddenberry, and S. Segarra, “Signal processing on higher-order networks: Livin’on the edge... and beyond,” Signal Processing , vol. 187, p. 108 149, 2021. [3] X. Hao, J. Li, Y. Guo, T. Jiang, and M. Yu, “Hyper-graph neural network for skeleton-based action recog-nition,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing , vol. 30, pp. 2263–2275, 2021. [4] S. Liu et al., “Semi-dynamic hypergraph neural net-work for 3d pose estimation.,” IJCAI , pp. 782–788, 2020. [5] V. La Gatta, V. Moscato, M. Pennone, M. Postiglione, and G. Sperlí, “Music recommendation via hyper-graph embedding,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Net-works and Learning systems , 2022. [6] X. Xia, H. Yin, J. Yu, Q. Wang, L. Cui, and X. Zhang, “Self-supervised hypergraph convolutional networks for session-based recommendation,” Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4503–4511, 2021. [7] R. Viñas et al., “Hypergraph factorization for multi-tissue gene expression imputation,” Nature machine intelligence , vol. 5, no. 7, pp. 739–753, 2023. [8] Y. Feng, H. You, Z. Zhang, R. Ji, and Y. Gao, “Hy-pergraph neural networks,” Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 33, no. 01, pp. 3558–3565, 2019. [9] S. Bai, F. Zhang, and P. H. Torr, “Hypergraph convo-lution and hypergraph attention,” Pattern Recognition ,vol. 110, p. 107 637, 2021. [10] Y. Dong, W. Sawin, and Y. Bengio, “Hnhn: Hy-pergraph networks with hyperedge neurons,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2006.12278 , 2020. [11] J. Huang and J. Yang, “Unignn: A unified framework for graph and hypergraph neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.00956 , 2021. [12] E. Chien, C. Pan, J. Peng, and O. Milenkovic, “You are allset: A multiset function framework for hypergraph neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13264 ,2021. [13] F. Wang, K. Pena-Pena, W. Qian, and G. R. Arce, “T-hypergnns: Hypergraph neural networks via tensor representations,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , pp. 1–15, 2024. DOI : 10 . 1109 / TNNLS.2024.3371382 [14] Z. Ying, J. You, C. Morris, X. Ren, W. Hamilton, and J. Leskovec, “Hierarchical graph representation learn-ing with differentiable pooling,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 31, 2018. [15] Y. Feng, J. Han, S. Ying, and Y. Gao, “Hypergraph iso-morphism computation,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 2024. [16] S. E. Finder, R. S. Weber, M. Eliasof, O. Freifeld, and E. Treister, “Improving the effective receptive field of message-passing neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.23185 , 2025. [17] H. Gao and S. Ji, “Graph u-nets,” international confer-ence on machine learning , pp. 2083–2092, 2019. [18] C. Vonessen, F. Grötschla, and R. Wattenhofer, “Next level message-passing with hierarchical sup-port graphs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.15852 , 2024. [19] Z. Zhong, C.-T. Li, and J. Pang, “Hierarchical message-passing graph neural networks,” Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery , vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 381–408, 2023. [20] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Con-volutional networks for biomedical image segmen-tation,” Medical image computing and computer-assisted intervention , pp. 234–241, 2015. [21] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition ,pp. 770–778, 2016. [22] E. Ranjan, S. Sanyal, and P. Talukdar, “Asap: Adap-tive structure aware pooling for learning hierarchical graph representations,” Proceedings of the AAAI confer-ence on artificial intelligence , vol. 34, no. 04, pp. 5470– 5477, 2020. [23] J. Wu, X. Chen, K. Xu, and S. Li, “Structural entropy guided graph hierarchical pooling,” International con-ference on machine learning , pp. 24 017–24 030, 2022. [24] Z. Wu, S. Pan, F. Chen, G. Long, C. Zhang, and S. Y. Philip, “A comprehensive survey on graph neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 4–24, 2020. [25] F. Wang, K. Pena-Pena, W. Qian, and G. R. Arce, “A unified view between tensor hypergraph neural net-works and signal denoising,” 2023 31st European Sig-nal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO) , pp. 1968–1972, 2023. [26] M. Schlichtkrull, T. N. Kipf, P. Bloem, R. Van Den Berg, I. Titov, and M. Welling, “Modeling relational data with graph convolutional networks,” European seman-tic web conference , pp. 593–607, 2018. [27] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl, “Neural message passing for quantum chemistry,” International conference on machine learning ,pp. 1263–1272, 2017. [28] S. Fortunato and D. Hric, “Community detection in networks: A user guide,” Physics reports , vol. 659, pp. 1–44, 2016. [29] J. Lee, I. Lee, and J. Kang, “Self-attention graph pooling,” International conference on machine learning ,pp. 3734–3743, 2019. [30] Z. Wang and S. Ji, “Second-order pooling for graph neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Anal-ysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 6870– 6880, 2020. [31] F. M. Bianchi, D. Grattarola, and C. Alippi, “Spec-tral clustering with graph neural networks for graph pooling,” International conference on machine learning ,pp. 874–883, 2020. [32] A. Duval and F. Malliaros, “Higher-order clustering and pooling for graph neural networks,” Proceedings JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 16 

of the 31st ACM international conference on information & knowledge management , pp. 426–435, 2022. [33] Y. G. Wang, M. Li, Z. Ma, G. Montufar, X. Zhuang, and Y. Fan, “Haar graph pooling,” International conference on machine learning , pp. 9952–9962, 2020. [34] M. Eliasof, B. J. Bodner, and E. Treister, “Haar wavelet feature compression for quantized graph convolu-tional networks,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems , vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 4542–4553, 2023. [35] L. Dhulipala, D. Eisenstat, J. Ł ˛ acki, V. Mirrokni, and J. Shi, “Hierarchical agglomerative graph clustering in nearly-linear time,” International conference on machine learning , pp. 2676–2686, 2021. [36] L. Dhulipala, J. Ł ˛ acki, J. Lee, and V. Mirrokni, “Tera-hac: Hierarchical agglomerative clustering of trillion-edge graphs,” Proceedings of the ACM on Management of Data , vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 1–27, 2023. [37] D. Zhou and B. Schölkopf, “A regularization frame-work for learning from graph data,” ICML 2004 Work-shop on Statistical Relational Learning and Its Connections to Other Fields (SRL 2004) , pp. 132–137, 2004. [38] D. Zhou, J. Huang, and B. Schölkopf, “Learning with hypergraphs: Clustering, classification, and embed-ding,” Advances in neural information processing systems ,pp. 1601–1608, 2007. [39] P. Li and O. Milenkovic, “Inhomogeneous hypergraph clustering with applications,” Advances in neural infor-mation processing systems , vol. 30, 2017. [40] T. Kumar, S. Vaidyanathan, H. Ananthapadmanab-han, S. Parthasarathy, and B. Ravindran, “A new measure of modularity in hypergraphs: Theoretical insights and implications for effective clustering,” Pro-ceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Com-plex Networks and Their Applications , pp. 286–297, 2020. [41] P. S. Chodrow, N. Veldt, and A. R. Benson, “Gen-erative hypergraph clustering: From blockmodels to modularity,” Science Advances , vol. 7, no. 28, eabh1303, 2021. [42] Z. Feng, M. Qiao, and H. Cheng, “Modularity-based hypergraph clustering: Random hypergraph model, hyperedge-cluster relation, and computation,” Pro-ceedings of the ACM on Management of Data , vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 1–25, 2023. [43] D. Cai, M. Song, C. Sun, B. Zhang, S. Hong, and H. Li, “Hypergraph structure learning for hypergraph neural networks.,” IJCAI , pp. 1923–1929, 2022. [44] D. Müllner, “Modern hierarchical, agglomerative clus-tering algorithms,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1109.2378 ,2011. [45] Z. Bar-Joseph, D. K. Gifford, and T. S. Jaakkola, “Fast optimal leaf ordering for hierarchical clustering,” 

Bioinformatics , vol. 17, no. suppl_1, S22–S29, 2001. [46] E. W. Dijkstra, “A note on two problems in connexion with graphs,” Edsger Wybe Dijkstra: his life, work, and legacy , pp. 287–290, 2022. [47] C. Bron and J. Kerbosch, “Algorithm 457: Finding all cliques of an undirected graph,” Communications of the ACM , vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 575–577, 1973. [48] W. Hamilton, Z. Ying, and J. Leskovec, “Inductive representation learning on large graphs,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 30, 2017. [49] B. Moseley and J. R. Wang, “Approximation bounds for hierarchical clustering: Average linkage, bisecting k-means, and local search,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1–36, 2023. [50] M. Charikar and V. Chatziafratis, “Approximate hier-archical clustering via sparsest cut and spreading met-rics,” Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms , pp. 841–854, 2017. [51] B.-A. Manghiuc and H. Sun, “Hierarchical clustering: 

O(1) -approximation for well-clustered graphs,” ad-vances in neural information processing systems , vol. 34, pp. 9278–9289, 2021. [52] M. Bateni et al., “Affinity clustering: Hierarchical clustering at scale,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 30, 2017. [53] F. M. Bianchi and V. Lachi, “The expressive power of pooling in graph neural networks,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , vol. 36, 2024. [54] C. Morris, N. M. Kriege, F. Bause, K. Kersting, P. Mutzel, and M. Neumann, “Tudataset: A collection of benchmark datasets for learning with graphs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.08663 , 2020. [55] K. Pena-Pena, L. Taipe, F. Wang, D. L. Lau, and G. R. Arce, “Learning hypergraphs tensor representations from data via t-hgsp,” IEEE Transactions on Signal and Information Processing over Networks , 2023. [56] B. Tang, S. Chen, and X. Dong, “Learning hypergraphs from signals with dual smoothness prior,” ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) , pp. 1–5, 2023. [57] A. K. Debnath, R. L. Lopez de Compadre, G. Debnath, A. J. Shusterman, and C. Hansch, “Structure-activity relationship of mutagenic aromatic and heteroaro-matic nitro compounds. correlation with molecular or-bital energies and hydrophobicity,” Journal of medicinal chemistry , vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 786–797, 1991. [58] E. Konstantinova and V. Skoroboratov, “Graph and hypergraph models of molecular structure: A com-parative analysis of indices,” Journal of structural chem-istry , vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 958–966, 1998. [59] S. Bai, F. Zhang, and P. H. Torr, “Hypergraph convo-lution and hypergraph attention,” Pattern Recognition ,vol. 110, p. 107 637, 2021. [60] F. Errica, M. Podda, D. Bacciu, and A. Micheli, “A fair comparison of graph neural networks for graph classification,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.09893 , 2019. [61] Y. Dou, Z. Liu, L. Sun, Y. Deng, H. Peng, and P. S. Yu, “Enhancing graph neural network-based fraud detectors against camouflaged fraudsters,” Proceedings of the 29th ACM international conference on information & knowledge management , pp. 315–324, 2020. [62] P. Veliˇ ckovi´ c, G. Cucurull, A. Casanova, A. Romero, P. Lio, and Y. Bengio, “Graph attention networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1710.10903 , 2017. [63] E. Chien, J. Peng, P. Li, and O. Milenkovic, “Adap-tive universal generalized pagerank graph neural net-work,” arXiv preprint:2006.07988 , 2020. JOURNAL OF L ATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 17 

[64] D. Bo, X. Wang, C. Shi, and H. Shen, “Beyond low-frequency information in graph convolutional net-works,” Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 3950–3957, 2021. [65] H. Peng, R. Zhang, Y. Dou, R. Yang, J. Zhang, and P. S. Yu, “Reinforced neighborhood selection guided multi-relational graph neural networks,” ACM Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS) , vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 1–46, 2021. [66] F. Shi, Y. Cao, Y. Shang, Y. Zhou, C. Zhou, and J. Wu, “H2-fdetector: A gnn-based fraud detector with homophilic and heterophilic connections,” Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2022 , pp. 1486–1494, 2022. [67] J. Tang, J. Li, Z. Gao, and J. Li, “Rethinking graph neural networks for anomaly detection,” International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 21 076–21 089, 2022. [68] J. Gasteiger, A. Bojchevski, and S. Günnemann, “Pre-dict then propagate: Graph neural networks meet per-sonalized pagerank,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1810.05997 ,2018. 

Fuli Wang received her M.Sc. degree in Statis-tics from the University of Minnesota in 2020, and her Ph.D degree in Financial Services Ana-lytics from Institute of Financial Services at the University of Delaware in 2024. Her research interests include hypergraph neural networks, hypergraph signal processing, and their applica-tions in finance and health. 

Wei Qian received his Ph.D. degree in Statistics from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, in 2014. He joined the School of Mathemat-ics and Statistics at Rochester Institute of Tech-nology as an assistant professor in the same year, and then moved to the Department of Ap-plied Economics and Statistics at the University of Delaware in 2017, where he has been an as-sociate professor since 2021. His research inter-ests include high-dimensional statistics, model selection, dimension reduction, statistical com-puting, deep learning, reinforcement learning, and data science appli-cations. He also serves as a JPMC Fellow and affiliated member of the Institute of Financial Services at the University of Delaware. 

Daniel L. Lau (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Sc. degree (with highest distinction) in elec-trical engineering from Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, USA, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA, in 1995 and 1999, respectively. He is currently a Professor and the Director of Graduate Studies at the University of Kentucky’s Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lexington, KY, USA. His research interests include image and signal processing, 3D imaging, and machine vision. His work has also been featured in trade magazines such as Imaging Insight, Prosilica Camera News, and Inspect Magazine. 

Gonzalo R. Arce (Life Fellow, IEEE) is currently the Charles Black Evans Distinguished Profes-sor of Electrical and Computer engineering, and a J.P. Morgan-Chase Senior Faculty Fellow in the Institute of Financial Services Analytics at the University of Delaware, Newark, DE, USA. He holds 25 U.S. patents and is the co-author of four books. His research interests include com-putational imaging, data science, and machine learning. He held the 2010 and 2017 Fulbright-Nokia Distinguished Chair of Information and Communications Technologies with Aalto University, Espoo, Finland. He received the NSF Research Initiation Award. He was elected Fellow of the IEEE, OPTICA, SPIE, AAIA, and the National Academy of Inventors (NAI).